 1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05394 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties which arose under circumstances 
largely beyond his control, but mitigated the potential security concerns raised under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations.)  Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on October 14, 2014. 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant received the SOR and answered it on June 24, 2016, requesting a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on August 16, 2016. On August 17, 2016, a complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 
 2 
6, was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the 
FORM on August 22, 2016, and his Response was received by the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) within the allotted 30 days. Department Counsel made no 
objections to Applicant’s Response and the attached documents, which I have collectively 
admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit A (AX A.) The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017.  
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017. The outcome 
of this case would have been the same if decided based on the former AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately $36,633. In his 
Answer, Applicant denies each of the allegations, however, he states that he is making 
payments on SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.l.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old system administrator currently employed by a defense 
contractor since April 2011, and by the defense industry since August 2008. He earned 
an associate’s degree in 2008. He is married and he and his wife have two children, 14 
and 8. He also has two adult children from prior relationships. (GX 3; GX 4.) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties arose due to a number of unanticipated financial 
pressures. In 2004 or 2005, Applicant cosigned a vehicle loan with his wife with monthly 
payments of about $400 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant’s wife lost her job in 2005 or 2006. She 
ultimately found employment, but for significantly less money. They attempted to return 
the vehicle to the dealership, where an employee told them about “gap insurance that 
would cover the amount [he] owed.” Applicant did not fully understand the process or its 
potential financial implications, including owing a deficiency, but agreed, and the vehicle 
was voluntarily repossessed. He did not receive any additional information about the 
account from the creditor. Upon review of his December 2014 credit bureau report, he 
saw the account listed as delinquent. He contacted the creditor and was referred to a 
collection agency. He agreed to settle the account for $8,000, with an initial payment of 
$331 in January 2015, a second payment of $250 in February 2015, and biweekly 
payments of $65. (GX 4; Answer.) 
 
In approximately March 2009, Applicant’s wife’s employer unexpectedly shut down 
without any notice and she was once again unemployed. About a week later, Applicant’s 
second child was born. Additionally, Applicant’s teenaged brother-in-law, whose mother 
was deployed overseas, resided with Applicant and his wife for approximately two years. 
With the expansion of Applicant’s household, his monthly expenses increased. Also, the 
cost of the tolls and gasoline required for Applicant’s long commute increased, and 
Applicant primarily used a credit card (SOR ¶ 1.c) to pay these costs. (GX 4; Response.) 
 
 3 
In June 2011, Applicant’s basement flooded, and he contacted his insurance 
company and a contractor. The contractor received a payment quote from the insurance 
company, and proceeded to complete repairs on the basement. Subsequently, an 
adjuster for the insurance company visited Applicant’s house and determined that the 
repairs were not covered by insurance. In about November 2012, after some 
miscommunications between Applicant and the contractor, the contractor entered a 
judgment against Applicant for about $9,000. Applicant settled the judgment with the 
contractor, and made monthly payments until October 2014, when the judgment was 
satisfied. These payments placed additional pressure on Applicant’s finances. (GX 4.)  
 
In 2011 or 2012, Applicant took out a personal loan to help pay off some of his bills 
(SOR ¶ 1.a), with monthly repayments of about $352. At some point he fell behind on his 
payments, and in about April 2013, entered a consent judgment with the creditor. The 
terms of the judgment required Applicant to pay $152 a month until the balance was paid 
in full. As of August 31, 2016, Applicant’s account was in good standing, with a balance 
of less than $5,000. (GX 4; AX A; Answer.) 
 
Applicant purchased a house in approximately October 2007, and regularly 
maintained his mortgage payments. In June 2014, in an effort to alleviate some of the 
financial pressure, he contacted the lender to try to arrange for a mortgage modification 
to reduce his monthly payments. In about September 2014, during negotiations, the 
lender sold the mortgage account to another lender. Applicant started modification 
negotiations with the new lender, which were ultimately successful. (GX 4; GX 6.) 
 
While experiencing ongoing financial strain, Applicant fell behind on his cellular 
and cable accounts, and was unable to timely pay his family’s medical debts, resulting in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.l. However, in late 2014, after paying off the judgment to the 
contractor, Applicant had the resources to pay SOR ¶¶ 1c, 1.i, and 1.f. He subsequently 
paid or settled in full SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.h, 1.j, and 1.l. (AX A.) According to the creditor 
of the vehicle loan (SOR ¶ 1.b), the account has been charged off, has a zero balance, 
and Applicant has “satisfied [his] contractual obligation and is no longer indebted” to the 
creditor. (AX A.) Applicant has not incurred any recent significant delinquent debt, and 
has “worked extremely hard to pay off and manage [his] debts.” (Response.) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
 4 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information…. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
However, a person can mitigate concerns about his or her ability to handle and 
safeguard classified information raised by his or her financial circumstances by 
establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. The 
relevant mitigating conditions in this case are: 
  
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties in about 2005, when his wife lost 
her job, which ultimately resulted in a voluntary repossession of their vehicle and the 
delinquent deficiency alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. His financial struggles were exacerbated in 
2009, by a number of factors which were largely beyond his control, including another 
period of his wife’s unemployment, the birth of another child, custodial support of his 
teenage brother-in-law, and overall economic changes. In 2011, Applicant’s basement 
flooded, creating additional financial stress.  
 
 6 
In 2011 or 2012, to alleviate some of his financial pressures, Applicant took a 
personal loan to pay some bills. He also opened a credit-card account to cover his 
commuting expenses. However, he was unable to maintain the monthly payments, which 
resulted in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He fell behind on his cellular and cable accounts, and 
was unable to timely pay his medical debt, as set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.l. 
 
However, Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. He entered a 
repayment plan with the personal-loan creditor (SOR ¶ 1.a) in April 2013, has been 
making monthly payments, and owes less than $5,000. He paid or settled SOR debts 1.c 
through 1.l. Upon learning of the deficiency owed for the repossessed vehicle in 2014 
(SOR 1.b), he immediately contacted the creditor and entered into a repayment plan with 
the collection agency. He is no longer under any financial obligation to the creditor. 
  
“Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an 
individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
Applicant acted in good faith by making monthly payments to his personal-loan 
creditor since 2013 and by paying or otherwise resolving each of the SOR debts. He has 
not incurred any significant recent delinquent debt. He established a plan to resolve his 
delinquent debts and pay his ongoing financial obligations and has followed that plan. AG 
¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
`Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 7 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
Applicant has worked in the defense industry since 2008. He was proactive in 
seeking and receiving a mortgage modification and in resolving his SOR debts. He has 
rectified his financial troubles. Applicant lives within his means.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:    For Applicant. 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
