 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06405 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on March 1, 
2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for June 27, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, but he did not submit documentary evidence. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Nothing additional was submitted. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2017.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 2001 until he was honorably discharged in 2014. He has 
worked for his current employer, or a predecessor contractor, since shortly after his 
discharge from the military. He seeks to retain a security clearance. He attended college 
for a period without earning a degree. He and his wife have two children, and he has 
two children from a previous relationship.1 
 
 The SOR alleges a $5,739 unpaid judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a); the underlying debt 
that resulted in the judgment (SOR ¶ 1.b); $2,861 in child support arrearages (SOR ¶ 
1.c); a debt that was $203 past due (SOR ¶ 1.d); and a $314 charged-off debt (SOR ¶ 
1.e). 
 
Applicant’s car was voluntarily repossessed in about 2007. He stated that his 
wife lost her job when he was transferred to a new duty station. The finance company 
obtained a $5,739 judgment against him in December 2010. Applicant testified that he 
settled the judgment for about $3,000 in 2016.2 He provided contradictory information in 
his March 2017 response to the SOR, in which he wrote:  
 
Once we had the judgment we contacted [creditor] about taking care of 
this matter they were no longer in service[.] I contacted the courts and 
they had no info on how to take care of this matter. This matter is no 
longer on my credit report.  
 
The judgment is reported by Equifax on the December 2014 combined credit report. It is 
not listed on the July 2016 and June 2017 Equifax credit reports.3  
 
 Applicant stated that his child support arrearages resulted from him paying 
money directly to the child’s mother before the court order was issued. He has been 
consistently paying his monthly child support obligation, plus arrearages. The debt is 
reported by Equifax on the December 2014 combined credit report. It is not listed on the 
July 2016 and June 2017 Equifax credit report.4 
 
 The revolving credit debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is listed on the December 2014 
credit report as $203 past due with a $991 balance. It is listed on the July 2016 and 
June 2017 credit reports as a charged-off account that was transferred or sold. The 
balance is reported as $0.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 31-33, 39-40; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 Tr. at 18-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
3 GE 4-6.  
 
4 Tr. at 22-23, 31-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4-6.  
 
5 GE 4-6.  
 
 
3 
 
 The delinquent credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is listed on the December 
2014 credit report as $134 past due with a $792 balance. It is listed on the July 2016 
and June 2017 credit reports as a charged-off account that was $314 past due, with an 
$884 balance.6 
 
 Applicant testified that his wife told him that she paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.e. He asserted that his finances are currently stable, and that he is able to pay 
his bills without accruing any additional delinquent debts. He has not received formal 
financial counseling. He was advised at the hearing of the importance of documenting 
his purported settlement of the judgment and payment of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.e.7 No documents were submitted. 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
December 2014. He did not report any issues under the financial questions. He denied 
intentionally falsifying the SF 86.8 After considering all the evidence, I find insufficient 
evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally falsified the SF 86. I attribute 
the false statements to an inattention to detail and a disregard for the state of his 
finances. 
 
 Applicant served deployments to combat zones. He was injured, which resulted 
in his medical retirement from the military. He is rated by the Department of Veterans 
Affairs as 100% disabled.9 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
6 GE 4-6.  
 
7 Tr. at 23-24, 34-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
8 Tr. at 24-27, 38-39; GE 1.  
 
9 Tr. at 27-30; GE 1.  
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems including an unpaid judgment after a 
repossession, child support arrearages, and delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges the underlying debt that resulted in the judgment alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. The same debt should not be alleged twice. SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  
 
I am satisfied that Applicant has been paying his child support and arrearages. 
SOR ¶ 1.c is mitigated. Applicant stated that his wife lost her job when he was 
transferred to a new duty station. He asserted, without documentation, that he settled 
 
6 
 
the judgment and paid the two delinquent debts. Applicant was put on notice of the 
importance of documenting any payments. He did not provide any documents during 
the hearing or post-hearing. The Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a 
Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of specific 
debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)). I am also concerned about the inconsistent 
statements about the judgment. Applicant admitted in his March 2017 response to the 
SOR that the judgment had not been paid, but he testified that he settled it in 2016.  
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally 
falsified the SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are 
concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, and particularly his multiple 
combat deployments. However, he has unresolved financial problems. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e: Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
