KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: From 2009 to 2013, Applicant did not have any Federal or state taxes withheld and
also did not file Federal or state income tax returns. IRS filed a tax lien against Applicant for
about $98,000, and he established an installment agreement with the IRS in which he agreed to
pay $66 per month on his Federal tax debt for 2009-2013. Decision reversed.
CASENO: 15-05478.a1
DATE: 10/2/2017
DATE: October 2, 2017    
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-05478
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
16, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On June 5, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert Robinson Gales granted Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 54-year-old financial planner who has been working for a defense contractor
since 1987.  From 2005 to 2011, he also worked part-time as a real estate agent.  He earned a
master’s degree in 1997 and was granted a security clearance in 2005.
Applicant attributes his financial problems to the collapse of the real estate market in 2008.
He had a rental property that became vacant for a few months that caused him to lower the rent. 
Income from his real estate activities, which accounted for about 25% of his total income,
disappeared.  Accounts, including his mortgage, became delinquent.  His pay was garnished.  While
he was able to settle a number of accounts for less than the full balance, others were charged off or
sold to collectors.  
From 2009 to 2013, Applicant did not have any Federal or state taxes withheld “because he
had insufficient funds available to pay his income taxes” (Decision at 3) and also did not file Federal
or state income tax returns.  He hired a tax preparation firm and legal representation to assist him. 
He filed his Federal income tax returns for 2009-2013 on April 11, 2014.  For those years, his annual
adjusted gross income ranged from about $90,000 to  $110,000.  In early 2015, the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) filed a tax lien against Applicant for about $98,000, and he established a installment
agreement with the IRS in which he agreed to pay $66 per month on his Federal tax debt for 2009-
2013.  “While Applicant failed to submit any documentation to support his contention that he has
a history of 20 months (as of September 2016) of making his monthly payments, based on his overall
actions in resolving various accounts, I am confident that he has made his modest monthly
payments.”  Decision at 3.  
Applicant contends that he filed his state income tax returns and paid all of his state income
taxes for the years in question, but failed to submit any documentation to support that contention. 
However, he was issued a state tax refund in 2015. 
Applicant had an unpaid balance of $166 on a department store charge card.  He claimed the
account was resolved several years ago, but failed to submit supporting documentation.  While the
account has not been resolved, it is of little security significance.
Applicant also had an automobile loan that was past-due about $600 with an unpaid balance
of about $27,000.  In his SOR response, Applicant indicated the automobile was involved in an
accident and delays in insurance payments occurred.  He denied the loan went into default and stated
the account was paid in July 2015.   
Applicant did not present a budget or other information that showed his monthly income,
expenses, and net monthly remainder.  Besides information about him seeking tax assistance, he
presented no evidence of financial counseling.  There is no evidence of any other delinquent
accounts.  His finances improved in 2014 and now seem to be under control.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The evidence established disqualifying conditions 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g).1  Applicant’s
financial difficulties were attributable to the national economic recession during 2007-2009, which
had a continuing negative impact over the ensuing years.  He was unable to keep his accounts
current or pay his taxes.  He reached out to creditors in a good-faith effort to resolve the debts and
was able to resolve a significant number of debts, file his Federal income tax returns, and establish
an installment agreement with the IRS.  He commenced a long road to recovery before the SOR was
issued and is making positive efforts to resolve his debts.  “Despite the absence of any financial
documentation from Applicant regarding his current finances, it is still possible to conclude that his
financial problems are under control.”  Decision at 7.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated
that Applicant was making positive efforts to resolve his debts.
Discussion
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371, U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”   Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of
the national security.”  Directive, Encl. 2, App. ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After
the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at
3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
1 This decision was issued three days before a revision of the adjudicative guidelines became effective.  The
previous version of the adjudicative guidelines that the Judge applied included the following applicable disqualifying
conditions:  ¶¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations;”
and 19(g) “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the
same.”  The current Directive contains similar disqualifying conditions.  See Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶¶ 19(a)
“inability to satisfy debts;” 19(b) “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” 19(c) “ a history of
not meeting financial obligations;” and 19(f) “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local taxes as required[.]”
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Department Counsel argues that the limited record in this case does not support the Judge’s
favorable mitigation and whole-person analysis.  Department Counsel contends that the Judge erred
in his assessment of the security significance of Applicant’s Federal and state tax problems as well
as in his evaluation of Applicant’s actions in addressing those problems.2 
A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal Government to protect national
secrets.  Accordingly, failure to honor other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on
assessing an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015).3  A person who fails repeatedly to
fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate
the high degree of judgment and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 14-04159 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 1, 2016).  In this case, Applicant failed to
file his 2009-2012 Federal or state income tax returns in a timely manner4 and failed to pay his 2009-
2013 Federal income taxes as required, which resulted in a $98,000 Federal tax lien.  His 2009
Federal income tax return was filed about four years late.  These failures to comply with Federal and
state tax laws suggest that Applicant has a problem with voluntarily abiding by well-established
government rules and regulations, which calls into question his suitability for a security clearance. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).     
Turning to the issue of mitigation, we find persuasive Department Counsel’s argument that
Applicant has not supplied enough evidence to meet his burden of persuasion under the Egan
standard.  Department Counsel asserts the Judge erred in finding that Applicant had insufficient
funds available to pay his income taxes.  It is axiomatic that the amount of income taxes imposed
2 In the appeal brief, Department Counsel raises no issues or arguments addressing the Judge’s favorable finding
regarding the two consumer debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. 
3 See also, Directive, Encl. 2, App. 2 ¶ 18 regarding the concern under Guideline F: “Failure or inability to live
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.”  This quoted sentence is from the revised
adjudicative guidelines; however, this sentence is identical to the previous version except for the addition of the words
“or sensitive” near its end.   
4 In appeal brief, Department Counsel notes Applicant filed his 2013 Federal income tax return in a timely
manner.  
over a given period never exceeds a certain percentage of the income earned.5  In his security
clearance application (SCA) and SOR response, Applicant indicated that he reduced his Federal and
state tax withholdings to settle debts and mitigate the effects of garnishments.  His hope was that,
after reducing his tax withholding in 2009, he would be able to bounce back financially the
following year.  This approach did not work and he did not have sufficient Federal and state tax
withholdings taken from his pay for 2009-2013.  Department Counsel convincingly argues that the
Federal tax debt was the result of Applicant’s choice to reduce his tax withholdings over several
years, and his decision to prioritize the payment of other expenses over his legal obligation to pay
his taxes.  Given these circumstances, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant was unable to pay his
Federal and state income taxes (Decision at 7) is not supportable.
Department Counsel also argues that the Judge’s analysis of the timing of Applicant’s actions
in attempting to resolve his tax problems is flawed.  The Judge emphasized that Applicant filed his
Federal tax returns about a year before the SOR was issued.  However, the record reflects that
Applicant did not file those tax returns until after he submitted his SCA and underwent his
background interview.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00279 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 23, 2015) for the
proposition that the timing of the resolution of financial problems is a relevant factor in evaluating
an applicant’s case for mitigation of Guideline F concerns.  The reason that timing is important is
that an applicant who begins to resolve financial problems only after being placed on notice that his
clearance was in jeopardy may lack the judgment and self-discipline to follow rules and regulations
over time or when there is no immediate threat to his own interests.  In this case, Applicant’s filing
of his Federal income tax returns for 2009-2012 after submitting his SCA and undergoing his
background interview diminishes the weight to which such remedial action might otherwise have
merited.  
The lack of corroboration of Applicant’s statements about his actions in mitigation is an
additional consideration in this case.  It is clear from statements by the Judge in the decision that he
acknowledged Applicant’s lack of corroboration in key areas.  First, while Applicant submitted a
copy of his IRS installment agreement in his response to the SOR, he did not submit proof that he
made any installment payments during the 20 months between the date of the installment agreement
and his response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).6  Notwithstanding this lack of
corroboration, the Judge stated that he was “confident” Applicant made those monthly payments.7 
5 In recent years, for example, the Federal tax rates had ranged between 10% and 39.6% depending on an
individual’s income.  See, https://www.irs.com/articles/2014-federal-tax-rates-personal-exemptions-and-standard-
deductions.  In 2012, the Federal income tax rates ranged between 10% and 35%.  See, https://www.irs.gov/
pub/irs-prior/i1040tt--2012.pdf.
6 We note that the  revised adjudicative guideline contains a new mitigating condition that addresses tax issues. 
Directive, Encl. 2, App. A, ¶ 20(g) that states, “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”  Since Applicant presented no proof of
payments under the IRS installment agreement before the record closed, he has not met the requirement of the second
prong of that mitigating condition.  Therefore, remanding the decision to the Judge for consideration of this new
mitigating condition is not warranted.  
7 In the past, the Appeal Board has held that it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present
documentation about efforts taken to resolve financial problems.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul.
30, 2008). 
This lack of corroboration undercuts the Judge’s determination that Applicant has demonstrated a
“‘meaningful track record’ of debt reduction.”  Decision at 10.  In the past, the Appeal Board has
stated that a “meaningful track record of debt reduction” generally includes establishing a plan to
resolve financial problems and taking significant action to implement that plan.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 07-06482 at 2 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  In this case, Applicant had not provided
corroborating documentary evidence that he has taken significant timely action to implement the IRS
installment agreement.8  Second, Applicant did not submit his state income tax returns in either
responding to the SOR or the FORM.  The only documentary evidence to support Applicant’s
contention that he filed his 2009-2013 state income tax returns is a copy of a state income tax refund
dated August 2015.9 The record contains no documentary evidence confirming when his 2009-2013
state income tax returns were filed.  The absence of such proof, including documentary proof that
he filed his 2014 and 2015 Federal and state income tax returns, undermines the Judge’s conclusion
that Applicant “has now embraced the paradigm of timely filing income tax returns.”  Decision at
9.  
Additionally, Department Counsel challenges the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s
“financial problems are under control.”  Decision at 7.  Department Counsel correctly points out that
the record contains no evidence of Applicant’s personal financial information such as a budget. 
Specifically, there is no information in the record about his monthly expenses.  Additionally, the
Judge’s statement that Applicant has no other delinquent debts (Decision at 10)  is contradicted by
record evidence.  Applicant’s most recent credit report in the record, which is dated March 2016,
reflects that he had two non-alleged accounts that became delinquent in late 2015 and early 2016
and that he had a non-alleged second mortgage that was charged-off for about $67,000.  The record
contains no evidence these non-alleged debts were resolved.  The Judge’s failure to address the non-
alleged debts in the decision impairs his mitigation and whole-person analysis.  In short, the record
evidence does not support the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s financial problems are under
control.
 Furthermore, Department Counsel maintains that the Judge’s analysis under the whole-
person concept is erroneous.  Department Counsel notes that analysis references no additional facts
or reasons why the limited record in this case supports a favorable decision.  Of note, Applicant
presented no character reference letters or work performance evaluations.  The whole-person
evidence presented consists of Applicant’s statements about himself in his SCA, his SOR response,
and his FORM response.  Thus, the Judge’s whole-person analysis essentially is a repetition of his
mitigation analysis, which for the reasons stated above was flawed.  
We conclude that the Judge’s decision failed to consider important aspects of the case, failed
to provide an satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, and runs contrary to the weight of the
record evidence.  Furthermore, we conclude that the record evidence, viewed as a whole, is not
sufficient to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Egan standard. 
8 In the Reply Brief, Applicant presented documents not previously submitted to the Judge for consideration. 
The Appeal Board is prohibited from considering new evidence on appeal.  Directive, ¶ E3.1.29.  
9 The tax year for which the refund applies is not specified in the document.  
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
