 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05229 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his illegal drug use. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on 
June 23, 2016, and he elected a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
August 22, 2016, Department Counsel submitted his file of relevant material (FORM) and 
provided a complete copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on August 31, 2016. 
He was afforded an opportunity to respond within 30 days of its receipt, to file objections, 
and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. On 
September 29, 2016, Applicant responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on June 2, 2017. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On August 10, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that although the 
SOR referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006, I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 
2017, pursuant to Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4). I also permitted the 
parties to supplement the record with additional evidence and argument. Both parties 
acknowledged receipt of my order. Applicant submitted four exhibits, which were into 
evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D without objection.2 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5.3 FORM Item 3 is 
an unauthenticated summary of an interview with a government investigator conducted 
on September 3, 2013. Department Counsel advised Applicant that he could object to 
FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, 
deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that his 
failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections may constitute waiver, and the 
evidence would be considered by me. Applicant responded to the FORM and did not file 
any objections. Given Department Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s education, I find 
his waiver to be knowing and intelligent.4 FORM Items 2-5 are admitted into evidence as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 2-5, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based upon Applicant’s marijuana use, 
including after having been granted a DOD security clearance. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant neither clearly admits nor denies the alleged conduct. I therefore 
construed his answers as denials. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 33 years old. From August 2002 to December 2007, he attended 
college, earning a bachelor’s degree. He earned a master’s degree in May 2012. From 
May to August 2005, he was employed full time as an engineering intern for a DOD 
contractor. He was married in April 2016 and has no children.5 
 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I includes my order and the parties’ emails acknowledging receipt. 
  
3 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s answer, which are pleadings and are included in the 
administrative record. 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
5 GE 2-3; Supplemental Response to FORM (Closing Argument). 
 
 
3 
 
 Since January 2008, he has been employed full time as an electrical engineer for 
a DOD contractor. Following the submission of a security clearance application (SCA) 
disclosing his prior illegal drug use, Applicant was granted a DOD interim secret clearance 
in March 2008, followed by a final secret clearance in June 2008. During the 2008 
clearance investigation, Applicant disclosed he had no future intent to use illegal drugs.6 
 
 In July 2013, Applicant submitted an updated SCA and disclosed using marijuana 
on multiple occasions between June 1998 and November 2012. During his September 
2013 security interview, he again admitted using marijuana on multiple occasions 
between June 1998 and November 2012. He also confirmed his understanding of the 
consequences of his illegal drug use, including a negative impact to his professional 
standing. In his May 2015 response to interrogatories, Applicant listed the date of his last 
use of illegal drugs as 2006.7 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the specific 
allegations, but admitted generally that he had exhibited poor judgment by using 
marijuana. He referenced his work performance and cited excerpts of several 
performance reviews; however, he did not provide any documentary evidence.  
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant admitted that his marijuana use continued 
on a “few” occasions during the five years after his college graduation [December 2007] 
and that his last use was in November 2012.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
6 GE 2, 3, and 5. 
 
7 GE 2-4. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a 
sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions between 1998 and November 
2012, and he admitted using marijuana on a “few” occasions after his college graduation 
 
5 
 
[December 2007]. Because his employment with a DOD contractor began in January 
2008 and he was granted a clearance in March 2008, it is reasonable to conclude that 
Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions after having been granted a security 
clearance. The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(f).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and  
 
(3) provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the 
drug involvement was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@8  
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use spanned over 14 years – beginning in high school, 
occurring in college, continuing into his employment with a DOD contractor and while 
possessing a security clearance, occurring during graduate school, and continuing until 
at least November 2012. Such conduct not only was illegal and violated DOD policies, 
but it also represented a breach of trust bestowed upon those entrusted with safeguarding 
classified information. Applicant has not presented any evidence about the circumstances 
leading to his more recent illegal drug use nor evidence of changed circumstances or 
conduct, thereby precluding a finding of reform or rehabilitation. Because his conduct 
casts doubt on his reliability and judgment, AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.   
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
6 
 
Applicant provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from future illegal drug 
use. Notably, he previously agreed to abstain from future drug use when he was granted 
a DOD clearance in 2008. His statement of intent is further undercut due to his lack of 
candor in his response to the drug interrogatories, in which he falsely indicated that his 
last use of illegal drugs was in 2006. Applicant’s answer and FORM response both focus 
on his professional achievements and fail to explain why he repeatedly used marijuana 
while possessing a clearance. Without more information as to the circumstances which 
led to his more recent marijuana use or his actions to put that conduct behind him, I cannot 
conclude that either the environment or circumstances have changed. Notwithstanding 
his statement of intent to cease further drug use, he has not provided evidence of actions 
he has taken to overcome his illegal drug use. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s repeated marijuana use while possessing a DOD security clearance is 
a serious security concern. Notwithstanding his professional accomplishments, Applicant 
has not provided documentary evidence as to his changed circumstances, good 
judgment, and rehabilitation. Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement and 
substance misuse security concerns.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes . . . (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
7 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s illegal drug use, including after having 
been granted a DOD clearance, as a personal conduct security concern.9 
Applicant’s marijuana use violated state and federal laws and violated DOD 
policies governing cleared personnel. Applicant acknowledged that his illegal drug 
use could affect his clearance and his career. There is no evidence that he has 
disclosed this information to his employer. AG ¶¶ 16(d)(3) and 16(e)(1) apply. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or such much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s repeated marijuana use while possessing a clearance is a serious 
breach of the DOD’s trust and demonstrates poor judgment. The paucity of evidence 
about the circumstances that led to his more recent marijuana use preclude a conclusion 
that those circumstances are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that a positive drug test could have a significant impact 
on his professional standing. There is no evidence that he has revealed his illegal drug 
use while possessing a clearance to his employer, a DOD contractor, or that he has taken 
any steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation.10 AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged the poor judgment displayed by his illegal drug use while 
possessing a security clearance, but also argues that he has never violated any security 
rules, regulations, or policies. To the contrary, his illegal drug use directly violated state 
and federal laws and DOD policies and breached the trust bestowed upon cleared 
personnel. Even if he has ceased his illegal drug use, concerns about his poor judgment 
and his vulnerability to exploitation remain. Applicant has not mitigated the personal 
conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
                                                          
9 Although the Government argues in its FORM that Applicant falsified his interrogatory response, no such 
falsification was alleged in the SOR. 
 
10 In his response to the FORM, Applicant references statements from the September 2013 security 
interview about his vulnerability to blackmail and coercion. These statements reflect Applicant’s responses 
to questions from the interviewer and not the interviewer’s conclusions. 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E and 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence demonstrating reform and 
rehabilitation in light of the serious breach of trust resulting from his marijuana use while 
possessing a security clearance. Moreover, there is no evidence that he has taken steps 
to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation given the impact to his professional 
standing due to his misconduct. He did not adhere to his previous statements to cease 
further drug use and he was not forthright in his disclosures about his illegal drug use in 
response to the drug interrogatories. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the drug 
involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.    Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.11 Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 See SEAD 4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(c). 
