1 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         )           ISCR Case No. 15-05825 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline K (handling protected 
information). Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline K. Applicant timely 
answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
on October 5, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on October 13, 2016, and had 30 days 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a two-page response to 
the FORM dated October 21, 2016. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 
through 5, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
September 15, 2017.  
 
2 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 64 years old. He obtained a master’s degree online in 2008 while 
simultaneously working full time. Applicant has been employed as a physical security 
officer or site security specialist for a federal contractor since December 2001. Applicant 
served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps for 25 years and received an honorable 
discharge when he retired in late 2001. He married in 1974 and divorced in 2001, and 
has been re-married since 2002. He has an adult son and an adult daughter. He has held 
previous security clearances since 1977 without incident before the transgressions 
alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant disclosed four security violations or infractions that he committed 
between 2011 and 2014, in section 13A of his 2014 Security Clearance Application 
(SCA). The earliest violation (SOR ¶ 1.d) occurred when Applicant printed the wrong level 
of security classification on three visitor badges, which allowed three people to attend a 
meeting that they were not authorized to attend. He received a written warning. Next, in 
January 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c), Applicant received a written warning when he gave classified 
information to someone who was not authorized to receive it. In December 2013, he 
received a written reprimand for taking classified material outside of a controlled area 
(SOR ¶ 1.b). In October 2014, he received a five-day suspension without pay for scanning 
multiple, classified documents into an unauthorized computer (SOR ¶ 1.a).  
 
In his response to the SOR on May 6, 2016, Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, with explanations. He admitted to printing incorrect 
clearance levels on three visitors’ badges before a short-fused, large meeting in 2011 
(SOR ¶ 1.d). All 100 plus visitors were listed on a single visit notification and the higher 
top secret (TS) clearance personnel were not separated from the lower clearance, secret 
level personnel. The initial meeting was at the secret level, and a follow-on meeting was 
at the TS level. All three visitors were properly cleared at the secret level and had a duty 
to correct the improper classification level on the badges.  
 
Applicant also admitted to handing an employee information that he or she was 
not cleared to receive (SOR ¶ 1.c). This employee came to the Contract Security Officer 
(CSO) desk to retrieve his folder. Applicant gave the folder to the employee because it 
had the employee’s name on it. It turned out that the employee was not briefed into the 
program. This employee bears some responsibility for not alerting Applicant that he was 
not cleared to receive this folder.  
 
In reference to the December 2013 reprimand alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant 
admits to removing classified information from a controlled area. He reviewed a stack of 
personnel records before removing them from an inbox that was supposed to contain only 
unclassified documents. Somebody had inadvertently placed classified documents in this 
                                                            
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 22, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 4) and his summary of clearance interview by a background 
investigator dated November 12, 2014 (Item 5).  
 
3 
 
inbox. These documents were intended to be delivered to different areas and buildings. 
Security personnel would routinely check the inbox and deliver these documents to 
whatever building they were going to. The particular document in question must have 
been stuck to another one, and Applicant did not see it. The person receiving or 
discovering the errant document, was briefed into the program and immediately returned 
it to the CSO office. There was no compromise. 
.   
The most recent allegation (SOR ¶ 1.a) occurred in October 2014 when Applicant 
admits to receiving a letter of reprimand and five-day suspension without pay for scanning 
classified documents into a lower-classified computer. The computer was a standalone 
system, which is only accessible by program personnel who have an authorized user 
name and password. Applicant was scanning in documents that were not supposed to be 
classified when he discovered that someone had inadvertently left some classified 
documents in the pile. This was discovered after Applicant had already scanned them 
into the computer. He immediately self-reported this incident and the computer in question 
was scrubbed to remove any classified information. There was no compromise. Applicant 
contends that the reprimand and suspension were for all of his aggregated security 
violations, since the contractor has a progressive punishment system 
 
During his clearance interview in November 2014, Applicant stated that with regard 
to his security violation in SOR ¶ 1.c, he handled thousands of pieces of classified and 
unclassified documents and materials daily. Applicant stated his intentions to slow down, 
be more careful and thorough so that he does not make any more errors.2  
 
In his October 21, 2016 statement provided in response to the FORM, Applicant 
states that the Contract Security Office (CSO) has been historically understaffed. The 
CSO maintains approximately 5,000 personnel records and supports 60 – 80 programs.  
Applicant handled all visits to program spaces and inputted all visit notifications and 
visitors’ information into the database. On average, he sent by fax approximately 11,000 
to 15,000 documents annually. There is no formal training program within the CSO. These 
four incidents were the product of an inadequate training program in the CSO. Applicant 
contends that he has learned from his mistakes and he is trustworthy and reliable. As 
evidence, he points to his recent promotion in January 2016 to the position of Assistant 
Contract Program Security Officer (ACPSO) in his company.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 DOD took action in this case under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
                                                            
2 Item 5, p. 4. 
 
4 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence singed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017.3 Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing 
of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
                                                            
3 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
              Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information  
 
The Concern. Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and 
regulations for handling protected information – which includes classified 
and other sensitive government information, and proprietary information - 
raises doubt about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or 
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious 
security concern.4 
 
Security clearance cases require administrative judges to assess whether an 
applicant has the requisite good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to be entrusted 
with classified information. When evidence is presented that an applicant previously 
mishandled classified information or violated a rule or regulation for the protection of 
protected information such an applicant bears a heavy burden in demonstrating that they 
should once again be found eligible for a security clearance.5 
 
 Applicant’s admitted commission of four security infractions within a three year 
period raises Guideline K security concerns. In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered 
the following pertinent disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 34: 
 
(a): deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(b): collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
 
(c): loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling protected information, including images, on any unauthorized 
equipment or medium;  
 
(g): any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and  
                                                            
4 AG ¶ 33. 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014) (very heavy burden standard); ISCR 
Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (security clearance determinations are “not an exact 
science, but rather predicative judgments.”). 
 
6 
 
(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management.  
 
           I also considered the conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns                     
including in AG ¶ 35: 
 
 (a): so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b): the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
 
(c): the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or 
unclear instructions; and 
 
 (d): the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 AG ¶ 35(a),(b),(c) and (d) all apply. The security violations were inadvertent and 
Applicant reported them timely. Sufficient time has passed since his last infraction in 2014 
to satisfy me that Applicant is not likely to repeat the same mistakes. In three of the four 
infractions, other employees were complicit and could have alerted Applicant. 
Significantly, he has recently been promoted to ACPSO. This is a strong indication of the 
faith and trust that his employer has in Applicant and his remediation of previous 
oversights. It demonstrates the company’s confidence in his trustworthiness and 
reliability, and his positive attitude toward the discharge of his security responsibilities. 
There was no evidence of compromise of classified information. I am confident that 
Applicant appreciates the significance of his lapses. He has maintained a security 
clearance for over 40 years. The violations he has admitted were oversights due to lack 
of conscientious attention to detail, understaffing, and inadequate training. He has 
improved his focus and vows to be more careful. He voluntarily disclosed these security 
violations, and he has accepted the reprimands and punishment meted out in each 
instance. He has met his heavy burden of persuasion.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline K in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has a demonstrated record of 25 
years of honorable service in the Marine Corps, and 16 more to federal contractors 
directly supporting DOD’s mission. He has made substantial contributions to military 
readiness. He has maintained a security clearance for over 40 years. Most importantly, 
Applicant self-disclosed the specific security violations alleged in the SOR on his SCA. 
His employer has confidence in his trustworthiness and reliability as evidenced by his 
recent promotion. He has met his burden of persuasion.  
 
Applicant’s multiple admitted security violations no longer remain a security 
concern. These offenses were minor and they were committed under such unusual 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that 
Applicant has acknowledged the egregiousness of his violations or taken steps to 
alleviate the stressors or circumstances that contributed his behavior to insure that it does 
not recur. He has met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no 
serious questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline K.  
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:              For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
