                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  15-06774          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial problems. Eligibility for access
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On May 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the September 2006
adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals who require initial or
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive
position. The new guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
Procedures for administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be
governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated substantive changes in the
AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the
issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 8, 2016, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on August 8, 2016.  He did not object to any of the exhibit items in the
FORM or provide supplemental information.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated (a) delinquent federal tax
debts totaling $22,110 for tax year 2011 and (b) two delinquent consumer debts totaling
$941. These alleged debts remain outstanding.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR debt ¶ 1.a, claiming he has
reduced the past-due balance to $16,440 under a payment plan he established with the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Disputing SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b-c, he claimed he paid these
debts. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old multimedia program analyst for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in June 2008 and has one child (age 5) from his  marriage. (Item
3) He reported no education credits or military service. Applicant has worked for his
current contractor since August 2014. (Item 3)  Between January 2005 and August 2014, 
he worked for non-DOD employers in various jobs.
Applicant’s finances
Applicant incurred a federal-tax debt in 2011 in the amount of $22,110. (Items 4-6)
He claimed he has since reduced the account balance on this tax debt, but provided no
documentation verifying his claim. Besides the federal-tax debt, Applicant accumulated
two delinquent consumer debts totaling $941. (Items 4-6). He furnished no evidence of
his addressing either of these debts either. 
2
Applicant provided no evidence of budgeting or financial counseling. Nor did he
furnish character references, performance evaluations, or evidence of community
involvement.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
3
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  An individual who
is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal
acts or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accrual of delinquent federal taxes
for tax year 2011 and accumulation of two delinquent consumer accounts. Applicant’s
accumulation of delinquent federal taxes for tax year 2011 and his accumulation  of
delinquent consumer debts warrant the application of four of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19 (b), “unwillingness to
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations”; and 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local
4
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of delinquent
consumer debts negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on
Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s delinquent consumer debts are
fully documented in his credit reports and create some judgment issues. See ISCR
Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in persons cleared to access classified
information. While the principal concern of a security clearance holder’s demonstrated
financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust
concerns are implicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of paying or otherwise resolving owed federal taxes to the
federal government in DOHA proceedings is critical to an assessment of an applicant’s
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and guidelines
necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a sensitive
position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No.
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015)
Whether Applicant has reduced the amount owing the federal government on the
delinquent taxes he accrued for tax year 2011 ($21,110) remains unclear. For he
provided no documentary evidence of his paying or otherwise resolving the reported tax
delinquencies for tax year 2011. Without substantiating evidence of his paying or
otherwise resolving his owed federal tax and consumer debts covered in the SOR,
drawn conclusions are warranted that he has not completed his payment obligations
pertaining to the listed debts in the SOR.  
Applicant provided no documented evidence of extenuating circumstances,
good-faith payments or payment plans, financial counseling, or reasonable disputes
with any of the listed SOR debts. Based on the evidence provided, none of the
mitigating conditions pertaining to evidenced good-faith payment initiatives, extenuating
circumstances, financial counseling, reasonable basis to dispute a past-due debt, or
payment arrangements made with the cognizable tax authority to file or pay the amount
owed  apply to Applicant’s situation.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted). In Applicant’s case, his lack of demonstrated responsible
efforts in addressing his SOR-listed tax and consumer obligations preclude favorable
findings and conclusions with respect to his security clearance application. See ISCR
Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). 
5
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his delinquent federal tax and consumer debts covered
in the SOR.  His actions to date reflect a lack of financial responsibility and judgment
and raise unresolved questions about his trustwothiness, reliability, and ability to protect
classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More documented information about his inability to
pay or otherwise resolve his delinquent federal taxes and consumer debts and
demonstrate financial progress is necessary to mitigate financial concerns under the
financial guideline and consideration of the whole-person to mitigate security concerns. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s federal tax and consumer debt accruals that he has failed to pay or resolve
to date, Applicant has failed to demonstrate enough probative efforts to mitigate
financial concerns. Conclusions are warranted that his finances are insufficiently
stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security
clearance.    
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under
the facts and circumstances of this case is not consistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                Against Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
6
  
7
  
8
