                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
            --------------------------------                    )      ISCR  Case No.  15-03003           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On November 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the September 2006
adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals who require initial or
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive
position. The new guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.
Procedures for administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be
governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated substantive changes in the
AGs. Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not
change the decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 9, 2015, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on July 6, 2015. Within the time permitted, he supplemented the record
with written explanations of his claimed status of the SOR debts in issue. He claimed
SOR debts ¶¶  1.a and 1.c were  settled; SOR debt ¶ 1.d was paid; and SOR debt ¶ 1.b
remains unsatisfied. Applicant’s submission was not objected to by Department Counsel
and is accepted as Item 10. The case was assigned to me on April 11, 2017.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four delinquent consumer
debts exceeding $32,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied most of the allegations. He claimed
he settled SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d through a debt consolidation firm and paid off SOR
debt ¶ 1.c with a check, leaving only SOR debt ¶ 1.b admitted and outstanding.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 65-year-old program analyst for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in August 1987 and has two adult children from this marriage.
(Item 4) Applicant earned his GED in 1973 while enlisted in the Marine Corp. He reported
no post-high school education credits.  
Applicant  enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1972 and served four years in the
Inactive Reserve. He received an honorable discharge in August 1976. (Item 4) Between
1977 and 1978, Applicant served in the Army National Guard and received an honorable
discharge in August 1978. (Item 4) Since August 1991, Applicant has been employed by
his current employer.
2
Finances
Between December 2010 and September 2012, Applicant accumulated four
delinquent consumer debts exceeding $32,000. (Items 5-8) He provided no explanations
of how these accounts became delinquent. (Items 2 and 9-10) 
In 2012, Applicant and his wife entered into a debt consolidation program to
address his delinquent accounts. (Items 2 and 9-10) Asked for information about his debt
consolidation program by an interviewing agent from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in interviews conducted in December 2012 and March 2013, Applicant could
provide no detailed information and referred the agent to his wife who manages the debt
consolidation account. (Item 9)
In his post-FORM response, Applicant provided a July 2012 debt repayment
summary covering payments made to his debt consolidation firm. The summary included
SOR accounts in his payment plan but no updated payment information about
specifically-listed SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a-1.b and 1.d. Credit reports included in the FORM and
Applicant’s response confirm that SOR debts 1.a-1.b were charged off in 2013 and are
not listed as accounts covered by his debt consolidation plan. (Items 6-8 and 10) 
Addressing SOR debt ¶ 1.d, the debt is listed in Applicant’s credit reports as the
same debt identified in the SOR.  This debt is reported as closed as a delinquent account
by the creditor in September 2011. (Item 5) Applicant’s credit reports contain no
references to the account reported in Applicant’s debt consolidation summary as the
same creditor as the one covered by SOR ¶ 1.d. 
Without more information from Applicant equating or connecting the creditor
covered in SOR ¶ 1.d with the one he claims to constitute the same account covered in
his debt consolidation plan, the two accounts cannot be treated as one and the same or
connected in any way  for  payment purposes.  Only Applicant’s claimed payoff of SOR
debt ¶ 1.c is sufficiently documented as a paid debt to be accepted as resolved. Absent
more corroborating evidence that SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a-1.b and 1.d have been fully
addressed and satisfied as claimed, Applicant cannot be credited with paying or resolving
any of these debts. Based on the information provided by Applicant in his OPM interview
and the data supplied in the credit reports and Applicant’s post-FORM materials, adverse
inferences are warranted that SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a-1.b and 1.d have not been paid or
resolved favorably to Applicant.  
Applicant provided no evidence of budgeting or financial counseling. Nor did he
furnish character references, performance evaluations, or evidence of community
involvement. 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, Appendix (App.) A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges
in the decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take
3
into account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual
applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
4
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of four delinquent
consumer debts covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d.  Security concerns are raised, accordingly,
over Applicant’s finances.
Applicant’s accumulation of four delinquent consumer debts warrant the
application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability
to satisfy debts,” DC ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to
do so,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
5
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
In Applicant’s case, he accumulated four delinquent debts between December
2010 and September 2012 exceeding $32,000. He has since paid or resolved SOR debt
¶ 1.c, but to date has not documented or provided adequate explanations of what
corrective steps he has taken to pay or resolve SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a-1.b and 1.d. Based on
the information provided by Applicant in his OPM interview and the data supplied in the
credit reports included in the administrative record, Applicant’s remaining debts remain
outstanding.
Applicant’s delinquent debts lack evidence of extenuating circumstances. MC ¶
20(b), which extenuates financial concerns where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation,
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” has no applicability to Applicant’s situation.
And based on Applicant’s limited efforts devoted to addressing his remaining debts, he
cannot take advantage of any of the other mitigating conditions covered by Guideline F.
  
Applicant’s unresolved debt delinquencies relative to SOR debts ¶ 1.a-1.b and
1.d prevent him from meeting the Appeal Board’s requirements for demonstrating
financial stability. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008); see also
ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1,
1999). While all of Applicant’s SOR debts may be barred by his state’s statute of
limitations, taking advantage of an enforcement bar due to the passage of time cannot
be equated with the establishment of a strong track record of payments. See ISCR 
Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010). 
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s contributions to the defense
industry with his current employer are worthy of considerable respect. They are not
enough, though, to overcome security concerns associated with his history of
accumulating significant consumer debts between December 2010 and September
2012.  To date, he has not addressed his delinquent SOR debts covered by ¶¶ 1.a-1.b
and 1.d, and they remain a source of trust concern.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt accruals and
failure to address three of them with the resources available to him, his actions to date
in dealing with his SOR debts are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed
by the guideline governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with
respect to the allegations covered by SOR debts  ¶¶ 1.a-1.b and 1.d under Guideline F.
Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by SOR
debt ¶ 1.c.
6
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact and the factors listed above, I make the following formal
findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.b and 1.d:                        Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.c:   For Applicant
                            
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
