 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-02463  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 
2011, and 2012, and owes at least $9,000 in outstanding taxes. He has six delinquent 
debts that he has not resolved. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On March 12, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. (Item 4.) 
On December 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD 
after September 1, 2006.1  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 21, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 3.) On 
April 11, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on April 12, 2016, and received by him on April 15, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, and did not file any 
objection to its contents; hence, Items 1 through 7 are admitted into evidence. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me on July 6, 
2017. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and married since 2001. He served in the Navy Reserve 
from 1988 to 1992. He received an honorable discharge. He held a security clearance 
while serving in the Navy, and subsequent to his discharge while working for defense 
contractors. He began his current position with a defense contractor in 2011. In March 
2014, he submitted an application for re-investigation for a security clearance. (Item 4.)  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied responsibility for the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, and offered explanations. He admitted the tax allegations in SOR 
¶¶1.h and 1.i. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant reported on his security clearance application that he failed to file a 2011 
Federal income tax return and pay all taxes as required. (Item 4.) In his answer to the 
SOR, he admitted that he failed to timely file Federal income tax returns for years 2003, 
2004, 2005, 2006, 2011, and 2012. (Item 3.) During a background interview with a 
government investigator in April 2014, he acknowledged that he owed the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) about $9,000 for tax years from 2003 through 2012. He said he 
was unable to pay 2011 and 2012 taxes because he had medical expenses related to his 
daughter’s illness and death in 2011. He acknowledged that the earlier tax-year problems 
resulted from his negligence. (Item 5.) He stated he made a “stupid mistake.” (Item 3.) 
 
 The SOR alleged seven debts that became delinquent between 2009 and 2013, 
and two allegations related to unfiled and unpaid Federal income taxes for specific years. 
The delinquencies totaled more than $16,000. Applicant provided documentation 
showing that he has title to the automobile referenced in SOR ¶ 1.a as a charged-off auto 
loan. The title was issued to him in October 2010. This debt is resolved. (Item 3.) Applicant 
did not provide documentation to prove that any of the other six delinquent debts are 
                                                 
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
resolved, being resolved, or have been removed from his credit reports after being 
successfully disputed as his debts.  
 
 Applicant did not submit any documentation confirming that he filed, albeit late, 
Federal tax returns for 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2011, or 2012, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. 
He submitted a letter from the IRS from July 2015 referencing unpaid taxes for tax years 
2005, 2012, and 2014.2 It proposed an installment plan to resolve those taxes, beginning 
in August 2015. (Item 3.) Applicant did not provide evidence that he made payments on 
that installment plan or resolved his 2003, 2004, 2006, or 2011 Federal taxes, as also 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. Applicant did not document any financial counseling or provide 
budget information from which to predict his future solvency.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
                                                 
2 The SOR did not allege unpaid taxes for 2014. That derogatory information will not be considered in the 
analysis of disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in the discussion of mitigating conditions and 
the evaluation of Applicant’s credibility. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant incurred what he estimated to be $9,000 in delinquent Federal income 
tax debts for tax years 2003 through 2012, and failed to file required Federal income tax 
returns for years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2011, and 2012. He did not provide proof of 
any payments to the IRS on its 2015 proposed installment agreement to address unpaid 
taxes. He has six delinquent debts that are unresolved. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) ) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file and pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s Federal tax issues and six delinquent debts are ongoing. He offered no 
reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not recur, so mitigation was not 
established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant asserted that his 2011 and 2012 tax problems arose as a result of his 
daughter’s illness and death in 2011 and were conditions beyond his control. He 
acknowledged that other tax year issues, and seemingly delinquent debts, resulted from 
 
 
6 
 
 
his negligence. There is no evidence that he acted responsibly while the debts and tax 
issues were arising, as required for full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He failed to provide 
evidence of financial counseling or good-faith efforts to resolve all financial allegations 
that could demonstrate that his financial problems are under control, and establish 
mitigation under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d).  
 
Applicant did not document a legitimate basis to dispute any of the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR, or submit evidence of compliance with an installment 
agreement with the IRS. Mitigation of security concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(g) 
were not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
is responsible for his decisions. He failed to demonstrate that he has paid, resolved, or is 
resolving outstanding Federal tax issues or delinquent debts. There is no evidence of 
rehabilitation or permanent behavioral changes. The potential for pressure, exploitation, 
or duress from his financial situation remains undiminished. Applicant’s actions to date 
are not sufficient to outweigh a history of non-compliance with a fundamental legal 
obligation to file and pay taxes. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
 
 
7 
 
 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).3  
 
Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
3 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
