KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant was notified that, should he choose a decision on the written record,
Applicant would have an opportunity to present additional written or documentary evidence to
the Judge. There is nothing in the record that would have led a reasonable person to believe that
some additional in-person interview was upcoming. Indeed, Applicant’s own SOR Answer,
made it clear that he did not want or expect a hearing unless somebody else decided it was
needed. Applicant was not denied the due process afforded by the Directive. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO:15-06494.a1
DATE: 10/05/2017
DATE: October 5, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06494
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On   
February 21, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On July 25, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the military, retiring in 2012 as an E-8.  In 2013 he began working for
a Defense contractor, and he seeks to retain a clearance that he held during his military career. 
Applicant’s SOR alleges numerous delinquent debts, totaling nearly $129,000.  These debts include
a past-due mortgage, a repossessed vehicle, a debt to the IRS, etc.  When he had been confronted
with his debts during his clearance interview, he told the investigator that he would research his
debts and take steps to resolve them.
Applicant claimed to have resolved or to be resolving some of his debts, including the one
to the IRS.  However, he did not corroborate these claims.  He also claimed to have been granted
a modification of his mortgage and to be awaiting payment agreements for other debts.  Applicant
attributed his problems to expenses associated with a divorce, although he submitted insufficient
information regarding the effect that it had on his finances. He also acknowledged his own “gross
negligence and irresponsibility” in handling his finances.  Decision at 2.  He has documented no
contacts with creditors since he submitted his security clearance application in early 2015.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that this case “is a failure of proof.”  Decision at 3.  He noted that Applicant
failed to provide documented proof of his claims of payment, payment plans, or of the effect that
his divorce exerted on his debt problems.  Although Applicant’s divorce was a circumstance beyond
his control, Applicant provided no details about it and he did not present evidence about when he
began to address his problems.  
Discussion
Applicant argues that he was not aware that he had to provide documentation to support his
claims of debt resolution.  He contends that the instructions accompanying the SOR were “vague
and unclear.”  Appeal Brief at 3.  He states that he thought that he would have an opportunity for
a subsequent interview in order to provide additional information.  
We find nothing in the SOR or the accompanying cover letter from the Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) that misrepresented the rights and obligations of an applicant for a
security clearance.  The CAF cover letter explained that Applicant could elect a hearing or instead
choose a decision on the written record.  Should he elect the latter, Applicant would be entitled to
provide a written response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  Applicant included the
following in his written Answer to the SOR: “I do not request a hearing before an Administrative
Judge, I wish to have an Administrative Judge issue a decision based upon the administrative record
and information I have provided and I am available if a hearing is deemed appropriate for further
questions.”    
Similarly, the FORM advised Applicant that he would have 30 days from its receipt “to
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or
explanation as appropriate.”  (Emphasis added)  It stated that, were Applicant to provide no such
response, the case would be assigned to the Judge for a decision based solely on the FORM.  The
DOHA letter that accompanied the FORM provided similar information.  Applicant also received
a copy of the Directive, which explains that an applicant who chooses a decision on the written
record is entitled to make “a documentary response” to the FORM.  Directive ¶ E3.1.7. (Emphasis
added)  
The gist of these various communications is that, should he choose a decision on the written
record, Applicant would have an opportunity to present additional written or documentary evidence
to the Judge.  There is nothing in the record that would have led a reasonable person to believe that
some additional in-person interview was upcoming.  Indeed, Applicant’s own SOR Answer, quoted
above, made it clear that he did not want or expect a hearing unless somebody else decided it was
needed.  Despite the clear guidance that Applicant received from the CAF and from DOHA, he
presented nothing in response to the FORM.  Given evidence that he has a college degree (SCA at
9) and that he attained senior NCO status in the military, there is no reason to believe that Applicant
lacked the ability to understand the information that was presented to him about his rights and
obligations.  If Applicant was not aware that his response to the FORM was to have been in writing
and that if he provided no such response the case would be decided based only upon the FORM and
nothing else, the responsibility cannot fairly be laid at the feet of the CAF or of DOHA.  Applicant
was not denied the due process afforded by the Directive.
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider evidence that supported his effort to
receive a favorable decision, such as the effect of his marital problems on his financial condition and
his claims about debt repayment.  He also points out that he has held a clearance for many years
without incident or concern.  Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the presumption that
the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record or to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-08711 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2017).  Applicant cites to a Hearing Office case that he believes
supports his effort to obtain a clearance.  We give this case due consideration as persuasive
authority.  However, Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the
Appeal Board.  ISCR Case No. 16-01941 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 9, 2017). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
