 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-06406  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
  
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 5, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On May 11, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on June 1, 2016. He admitted all of the 
SOR allegations concerning his delinquent debts, except for allegations 1.e. and i.g. 
(Applicant neither admitted nor denied allegation 1.e., which I take as a denial.) He 
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. (Item 2.) On June 30, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing seven Items, was mailed to Applicant on July 5, 2016, and received by him 
on July 14, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted nothing in response to the FORM. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. (Item 3 at page 5.) He is divorced, with one adult child. 
(Item 3 at pages 16 and 19.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor A as the result of a judgment 
in the amount of about $9,878. Applicant avers, “This account has not been settled to 
date [the date of his June 1, 2016, Answer].” This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.b. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor B as the result of a second 
judgment in the amount of about $26,513. Applicant avers, “The judgment remains in 
place, however, a repayment plan was agreed upon in June 2014 and remains in 
effect.” As Applicant has submitted nothing in support of his averment, this allegation is 
found against Applicant. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor C as the result of a third 
judgment in the amount of about $7,173. Applicant avers, “This account has not been 
settled to date [the date of his June 1, 2016, Answer].” This allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor D as the result of a past-due 
mortgage in the amount of about $41,958, on a balance totaling about $322,657. 
Applicant avers, “This loan went to foreclosure on 1/12/16. The property was put up for 
sale by . . . [Creditor D].” As Applicant has submitted nothing in support of his averment, 
 
 
3 
 
 
such as an Internal Revenue Service Form 1099 showing his mortgage debt was 
forgiven and reported as income to Applicant, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant neither admits nor denies a past-due debt to Creditor E in the 
amount of about $2,665. As this debt appears as past due on the Government’s 
December 2014 credit report (Item 4), this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor F in the amount of about 
$4,930. Applicant avers, “However, there is a repayment plan in place with . . . [Creditor 
F’s fiscal intermediary], which acts on behalf of . . . [Creditor F].” As Applicant has 
submitted nothing in support of his averment, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.g. Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor G as the result of a past-due 
debt in the amount of about $873. Applicant avers, “This account was settled in October 
2012.” As Applicant has submitted nothing in support of his averment; and it appears on 
the Government’s most recent March 2016 credit report (Item 6), this allegation is found 
against Applicant. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has three outstanding judgments, two delinquent mortgage debts, and 
two delinquent consumer debts. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
Applicant has submitted nothing in mitigation of financial security concerns under 
the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. He has not met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
