 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06523 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on August 2, 2016, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on August 31, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on November 29, 2016. 
As of January 25, 2017, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in 
evidence.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. He will 
be hired if he obtains a security clearance. He served on active duty in the U.S. military 
from 1992 until he was honorably discharged in 1995. He attended college for a period 
without earning a degree. The most recent information available indicates that he is 
married for the second time, with a 17-year-old child and two adult stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant worked from 2003 to July 2014 for his state’s Department of 
Corrections. He was forced to resign after threats were made against his life. He had 
financial difficulties before his resignation, which he attributed to identity theft in 2009 
and a 2011 auto accident that left him unable to work for three months. He also had to 
move from a rental home in January 2013 when the home was unexpectedly sold.2 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in 2011 as a means of 
protecting their home from foreclosure. They were unable to maintain the payments, 
and the case was dismissed in 2012. The home was lost to foreclosure.3 
 
 The SOR alleges the Chapter 13 bankruptcy case (SOR ¶ 1.i); a $15,409 second 
mortgage or home equity loan (SOR ¶ 1.f); a $13,176 charged-off auto loan (SOR ¶ 
1.a); five miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling $3,316 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d, 1.g, and 1.h) 
and a $789 federal tax lien filed in 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.e). 
 
 Applicant admitted owing all the debts with the exception of the federal tax lien 
(SOR ¶ 1.e), an $805 credit card for a home improvement store (SOR ¶ 1.g), and a 
$1,524 public utilities debt (SOR ¶ 1.h). A credit report from December 2014 lists a $789 
state tax lien. It does not list a federal tax lien. Applicant asserted that he never owned a 
credit card from the home improvement store. That debt and the $1,524 public utilities 
debt are both listed on the December 2014 credit report, but not the July 2015 credit 
report.4  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $15,409 home equity loan (SOR ¶ 1.f). He thought 
the debt was resolved through the foreclosure. The July 2015 credit report lists the debt 
with a $0 balance and that the “account was paid for less than full balance; paid charge 
off.”5 
 
 Applicant was still unemployed when he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in March 2015. He stated that he was in possession of the car that was 
security for the $13,176 charged-off auto loan, but he had not made any payments 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 Items 1-5. 
 
4 Item 1, 3-5. 
 
5 Item 1, 3-5. 
 
3 
 
since 2013. The credit reports show the date of last activity on the loan as 2011. He 
described his financial situation as being “dirt poor.” He stated that he will pay his debts 
if he gets a job. He has not received formal financial counseling, but he took free on-line 
courses.6 Because he did not respond to the FORM, the current state of Applicant’s 
finances is unknown. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
6 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) are applicable. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $789 federal tax lien. There is evidence of a $789 state tax 
lien, but not a federal tax lien. The facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e have not been 
established. AG ¶ 19(f) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.e is concluded for Applicant.  
 
 
5 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems predate his resignation from the Department of 
Corrections. He attributed those problems to identity theft in 2009, a 2011 auto accident 
that left him unable to work for three months, and the unexpected sale of the home he 
was renting.  
 
 Applicant cannot pay his delinquent debts while he is unemployed, but other than 
filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, which was dismissed for non-payment, there is 
little evidence of any actions to address his debts while he was employed. He had a car 
for several years without making any loan payments. He stated that he will pay his 
debts if he gets a job. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the 
future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)). Because he did not respond 
to the FORM, the current state of Applicant’s finances is unknown. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
 
6 
 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. The $15,409 home equity 
loan (SOR ¶ 1.f) was apparently resolved through the foreclosure. That debt is 
mitigated. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. I find 
that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
