 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03712 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 24, 2016, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on April 5, 2016. A complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on May 30, 2017. As of July 10, 2017, 
he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2017. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. The most recent 
information available indicates that his two marriages ended in divorce in 2004 and 
2010. He does not have children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges a past-due mortgage loan that was in foreclosure and two 
delinquent debts totaling $239. The debts are established by Applicant’s admissions 
and credit reports from August 2012 and April 2015.2 
 
 There is little in the record about the cause of Applicant’s financial problems 
other than his 2010 divorce. He has been steadily employed in the defense industry for 
more than 20 years. He reported his foreclosed mortgage loan in his August 2012 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). He wrote that they tried to sell the 
house in 2010, and it was on the market for ten months. He indicated that by the time 
he was able to catch up on the loan, it was too late. The loan is listed on the April 2015 
credit report as $24,610 past due, with a $137,444 balance, and in foreclosure. 
Applicant wrote in response to the SOR that he contacted the creditor in an attempt to 
settle the account. He was told the account was closed and had not gone to a collection 
company. He stated that he was unable to start paying the debt.3 
 
 Applicant wrote in his February 2016 response to the SOR that he was unaware 
of the $158 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He wrote that it was a joint debt with his ex-wife, 
and he made arrangements to pay the debt in March 2016. The debt is listed on the 
August 2012 and April 2015 credit reports as an individual charged-off debt that was 
$158 past due, with a $620 balance.4 
 
 Applicant also wrote in his response to the SOR that he was unaware of the $81 
utilities debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He wrote that the debt was tied to his foreclosed 
home. He stated that he had made arrangements to pay the debt in March 2016.5 
 
 Department Counsel noted in the FORM that Applicant did not submit any 
documentary evidence about the status of the three debts. He further noted: 
 
Absent compelling evidence that Applicant has made, and then carried out 
arrangements to resolve his delinquent debts, the evidence in this record 
precludes finding that he has the good judgment and reliability needed to 
be cleared for access to classified information . . . . 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2-5.  
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Items 2, 4, 5.  
 
5 Items 2, 4, 5.  
 
3 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. Because he 
did not respond to the FORM, the current state of Applicant’s finances is unknown. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s foreclosed mortgage loan was apparently related to his 2010 divorce. 
The record is lacking details about Applicant’s financial circumstances. He wrote in 
response to the SOR that he intended to pay the two non-mortgage debts the following 
month. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not 
a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See 
ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-
08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)). The FORM put Applicant on notice of the 
importance of documenting any payments. He did not respond. The Appeal Board has 
further held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2006)).  
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
