 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-06783 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 The information about Applicant’s possession of a Romanian passport is no 
longer disqualifying. Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 30, 2013 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information, 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
On April 7, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline C (Foreign Preference).2 At the time 
the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my 
recommended decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs. 
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On September 15, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support 
of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November 9, 2016, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in support of his case.4 Applicant did not object to the use 
of any information in the FORM; nor did he provide any additional information in 
response to the FORM. I received the case on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Romania. He immigrated to the 
United States in 1998 and became a United States citizen in September 2010. The 
Government alleged in the SOR that, as a U.S. citizen, Applicant also exercised his 
Romanian citizenship by renewing his Romanian passport in June 2009 for another ten 
years (SOR 1.a(1)); and that he is unwilling to relinquish his Romanian passport (SOR 
1.a(2). Applicant admitted renewing his Romanian passport, but denied doing so after 
becoming a U.S. citizen. He also denied being unwilling to relinquish his foreign 
passport. (FORM, Items 1 – 4) 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He and his wife have been married since July 1992 and 
have three children, ages 8 – 22. Applicant earned a PhD in 1995 and has been a 
professor at a large university in the United States since July 2002. Since February 
2013, he also has been a committee member of a prominent scientific organization in 
the United States. In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed that he owns a house in Romania 
worth about $120,000. He bought the house for his mother after his father died. When 
his mother dies, he likely sell the house when he wraps up her estate. To do this, by 
Romanian law, he must be able to show that he is a Romanian citizen and lawful owner 
of the property. For that reason, he does not wish to relinquish his Romanian passport. 
Applicant has not used his Romanian passport since becoming a U.S. citizen. (FORM, 
Items 3 – 5) 
 
 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on five enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 - 5). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information. A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.9 
 
                                                 
5 See Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
  
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s renewal and continued 
possession of a foreign passport reasonably raised the security concern expressed at 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
At the time the SOR was issued, mere possession of a foreign passport was 
potentially disqualifying.10 Under the new guidelines, possession of a foreign passport 
only becomes disqualifying when an individual uses that passport instead of a valid U.S. 
passport for travel in and out of the United States.11 That has not occurred here. SOR 
1.a(1) is resolved for Applicant. 
 
As to SOR 1.a(2), Applicant’s unwillingness to relinquish his passport is not, in 
and of itself, disqualifying. Under the old adjudicative guidelines, there was potential 
mitigation in a willingness to renounce foreign citizenship12 or if one’s passport had 
been relinquished to the custody of proper authority.13 Nonetheless, Department 
Counsel argues that Applicant exercised his foreign citizenship to protect a financial or 
business interest in a foreign country. This may have been disqualifying under the 
previous guidelines;14 however, current guidelines now require such conduct to be in 
                                                 
10 See AG ¶10(a) of the adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006 (exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship 
of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport.). 
 
11 See AG ¶10(c) of the adjudicative guidelines effective for adjudicative actions taken after June 8, 2017 
(failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.).  
  
12 See AG ¶11(b) of the adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006 (the individual has 
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship). 
 
13 See AG ¶11(e) of the adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006 (the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated). 
 
14 See AG ¶10(a)(5) of the adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006 (using foreign citizenship 
to protect financial or business interests in another country). 
 
5 
 
violation of U.S. law before it is disqualifying.15 That is not the case here. SOR 1.a(2) is 
resolved for Applicant. The security concerns raised by the Government’s information 
are resolved for Applicant. 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the record evidence as a whole shows that the doubts about Applicant’s 
suitability for clearance raised by the Government’s information have been resolved. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is granted. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
15 See AG ¶10(e) of the adjudicative guidelines effective for adjudicative actions taken after June 8, 2017 
(using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country in violation of U.S. 
law). 
