1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01335 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties due to circumstances largely beyond 
her control, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly. Her omission on her security 
clearance application was unintentional. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on May 27, 2014. On 
March 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant submitted her Answer to the SOR through her counsel on May 16, 2016, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready 
to proceed on December 2, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on March 20, 2017. 
2 
 
On April 13, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant 
that the hearing was scheduled for May 2, 2017, via video teleconference. Department 
Counsel, Applicant’s counsel, and I were in Arlington, Virginia, and Applicant was at a 
remote location. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through M were admitted without objection. I left the record 
open until May 16, 2017, to allow applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. 
She submitted AX N through Q, which were admitted without objection DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on May 15, 2017. 
 
This case was adjudicated under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The 
DOD implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. 
This decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017. The 
outcome of this case would have been the same if decided based on the former AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old financial analyst currently employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2015. She completed three years of college and is currently 
taking one class. She and her husband married in August 1998. Applicant has a 20-year-
old daughter, and Applicant and her husband have two sons ages 17 and 9. Applicant 
was employed as a federal employee from 2001 through 2005, and has been working as 
a government contractor since 2006. (GX 1; AX G.)  
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges three past-due accounts totaling $1,986 and 
a charged-off account totaling $28,136. Applicant admits the three past-due accounts, but 
denies the charged-off account. The SOR also alleges under Guideline E that Applicant 
intentionally falsified her security clearance application by failing to disclose the charged-
off account. Applicant denies this allegation. Her admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact. The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports 
(CBR) from January 2015 and June 2014. (GX 2; GX 3.)  
 
In 2005, Applicant’s husband moved abroad to work for a defense contractor. 
Several months later, Applicant and her children joined him. Both Applicant and her 
husband worked and lived abroad for nearly 9 years. In June 2013, Applicant’s husband 
was offered a new job, and he and the children returned to the United States, while 
Applicant remained abroad. However, Applicant’s husband’s new job fell through and he 
was unemployed from June 2013 until May 2014. Applicant and her husband were 
supporting two households and trying to maintain their other financial obligations solely 
on Applicant’s salary. While working abroad, Applicant’s husband’s salary had been 
significantly higher than Applicant’s. The loss of Applicant’s husband’s income created an 
enormous financial strain on them. By August 2013, Applicant was depleting her savings 
and acquiring debt. She applied for and received two credit cards which she used for 
living expenses. (Tr. 27-28.) 
 
3 
 
Applicant returned to the United States in March 2014, after her contract ended. 
She took a part-time consulting job with the same contractor, which resulted in a decrease 
in salary from about $80,000 to about $35,000. In May 2014, Applicant began working full 
time for another defense contractor. In August or September 2014, Applicant’s consulting 
job ended. Applicant was living in a rent-to-own home, which required substantial 
renovations and repairs. Applicant completed the one-year lease, cut her financial losses, 
and moved to a smaller home that is more financially manageable. 
 
The $364 past-due account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was for a student loan. Due to 
her financial struggles, Applicant contacted the creditor and her student loan was placed 
in forbearance from November 2015 until November 2016. (AX A; Tr. 55.) In August 2015, 
due to the late payments, the interest rates on Applicant’s credit cards (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c) dramatically increased and she was unable to maintain the payments. In October 
2015, Applicant’s employer lost its contract, and Applicant was unemployed for 
approximately one month, until she went to work for her current employer. 
 
In approximately March 2016, Applicant entered settlement agreements and 
repayment plans with the creditor of SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, with monthly payments totaling 
about $350. In April 2016, she completed a financial counseling course and started credit 
monitoring through her bank. Aware that she needed to get her financial situation under 
control, Applicant began to pay her smaller debts. However she “realized that [she] 
needed to get a better grasp” on her finances and contacted a bankruptcy attorney who 
recommended Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (AX K.) Applicant completed a second credit 
counseling course in November 2016, then filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. She and her 
husband have each been making biweekly payments of $528, withdrawn directly from 
their paychecks, since December 2016. SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c are included in the 
bankruptcy. (AX N; AX O.) 
 
The $28,136 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is the original amount Applicant cosigned 
for to enable her husband to purchase a vehicle in approximately March 2004. When 
Applicant left to work abroad, she and her father-in-law agreed that he would assume the 
payments and use of the vehicle. However, when Applicant returned home for a visit in 
2006, she discovered that the vehicle had been repossessed in 2005. In an effort to 
maintain her financial good standing, Applicant contacted the creditor and made monthly 
payments for approximately six to eight months, until the original creditor sold the loan. 
At some point, Applicant learned that the vehicle had been sold and that the deficiency 
was approximately $8000. The loan was sold a second time while Applicant was still living 
abroad, and she ultimately “lost track of the debt.” (Tr. 42-46; Tr. 60.) The account was 
closed and the debt charged off in September 2012. (GX 3.) 
 
Applicant sent a registered letter to the current creditor seeking information about 
the charged-off vehicle loan. She also made several telephone calls to the creditor and 
was informed that it could not locate an account number or the balance and that the 
account was closed. Applicant could not include this debt in her bankruptcy due to lack 
of information. (Tr. 46-47.) Applicant did not list this debt on her 2014 e-QIP because it 
did not appear on her credit bureau report and because it was greater than seven years 
4 
 
old. She denies this debt because it does not account for the payments she made. She 
is willing to repay this debt. (Tr. 26; GX 4.) 
 
Between 2005 in 2015, Applicant and her husband provided their parents with 
financial assistance for medical care and living expenses, as well as performed caregiver 
tasks during the various illnesses from which their parents suffered. They no longer have 
these financial responsibilities. (AX K; Tr. 33.) Additionally, Applicant’s daughter is in the 
U.S. Army and financially independent. (Tr. 35.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor highly recommends her and considers her to be “loyal, 
honest, respectful, considerate and reliable friend and employee.” (AX I.) She now earns 
approximately $62,000 annually and her husband earns approximately $74,000. (Tr. 28-
29.) Applicant has not incurred any significant recent delinquent debt, she maintains a 
budget, and lives within her means. (AX N; Tr. 56.) She does not have any open credit- 
card accounts, and pays her monthly bills with money orders. (Tr. 56; Tr. 62.) She was 
candid, sincere, and credible while testifying. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
5 
 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds…. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
6 
 
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 However, a person can mitigate concerns about his or her ability to handle and 
safeguard classified information raised by his or her financial circumstances by 
establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. The 
relevant mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose due to circumstances largely beyond her 
control. Specifically, both Applicant and her husband had periods of unemployment, 
Applicant was underemployed for a sustained period of time, and she provided financial 
support for her parents and in-laws. She acted responsibly under the circumstances by 
placing her student loan and forbearance, and contacting the creditor of two of the SOR 
debts and entering repayment plans. She continued to make payments on the vehicle 
loan after the vehicle was repossessed, but was ultimately unable to maintain those 
payments. She made multiple attempts to contact the creditor of the loan, but was unable 
to obtain sufficient information, including an accurate balance, in order to repay the debt. 
Applicant completed two financial management courses. She filed chapter 13 bankruptcy 
on the recommendation of a bankruptcy attorney and has been consistently making 
automatic payments since December 2016. She lives within her means, maintains a 
budget, has no open credit-card accounts, pays her bills with money orders, and has not 
incurred any significant recent delinquent debt. 
 
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a 
7 
 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
  
 Applicant’s financial difficulties did not arise under circumstances that suggest 
reckless or irresponsible behavior. Overall, she has addressed her debts in a responsible 
manner, and will continue to do so. Although her financial record is not perfect, she has 
implemented a reasonable plan to resolve her financial issues within her means. AG ¶¶ 
20(b) through 20(e) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a):deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant explained that she did not list the charged-off vehicle-loan debt on her 
2014 e-QIP because the debt did not appear on her credit bureau report and because 
she thought the debt was greater than 10 years old. I found her explanation to be credible 
and consistent with the record evidence, and her demeanor to be honest, forthcoming, 
and candid. Therefore, I conclude that she did not intentionally falsify her e-QIP. 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has worked for and in support of the Government since 2001. She 
recognized that her efforts to manage her finances were insufficient and sought 
professional advice. She has implemented a plan to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines E and 
F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
