 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08151 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 23, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated March 23, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated December 30, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on January 24, 2017, and he was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on January 
31, 2017. Applicant’s response was due on March 2, 2017. As of October 1, 2017, 
Applicant had not submitted any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) of the SOR. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has served as an 
order filler/laborer since April 2015, but previously worked for the same employer for 
several months in 2014. He also worked part-time, and later full-time, as a teacher at a 
childcare center from March 2010 until April 2015. He is a 2010 high school graduate. 
Applicant has never served in the U.S. military. He has never held a security clearance. 
Applicant has never been married, but has resided with a cohabitant since December 
2012. He has one daughter, born in 2014, and his cohabitant has one son, born in 2009.  
 
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations3 
It appears that Applicant’s finances became an issue in 2011 when he was 
admitted to a hospital emergency room. He completed paperwork to apply for financial 
aid, but he never received a bill or any collection notices until 2012. When he attempted 
to enlist in the U.S. Army in 2012, he was required to undergo a medical examination for 
a certain medical condition, and he was under the impression the U.S. Army would cover 
the expenses.  He was subsequently denied enlistment, and he was advised that he was 
responsible for the expenses.  Applicant was unable to pay his various medical accounts, 
as well as a traffic citation because he had insufficient funds to do so. In September 2015, 
when he was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), he indicated he would contact most of his creditors or collection 
agents to make payment arrangements, and pay off the accounts. He claimed he has 
sufficient funds for his current accounts, as well as the expenses for his cohabitant’s son, 
but because his wages are not high, and his cohabitant’s wages are not high, he cannot 
address the delinquent accounts at the present time. He did indicate that he intends to 
pay his debts in the future.4 He also indicated that he might seek financial guidance. There 
is no evidence that he ever did so. 
The SOR identified eight purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, as generally reflected by his two 2015 credit reports. Those debts, totaling 
approximately $11,707, their current status, according to the credit reports, other 
evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments 
regarding same, are described below. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., and 1.f.): These are three medical accounts with unpaid 
balances of $2,091, $605, and $7,180 that were placed for collection with the same 
collection agent. Applicant admitted in his Answer to the SOR that the accounts remain 
delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts to contact 
the creditor or collection agent to resolve them. The accounts have not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of $921 
that was placed for collection. Applicant initially denied knowledge of the account or the 
collection agent. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account remains 
delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts to contact 
the creditor or collection agent to resolve it. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is an Internet cable account with an unpaid balance of $265 that 
was placed for collection. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account 
                                                          
3 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 7, 2015; Item 5 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated October 27, 2015); Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated September 15, 2015). 
 
4 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute 
for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR 
Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
remains delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts 
to contact the creditor or collection agent to resolve it. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.g., and 1.h.): These are three medical accounts with unpaid 
balances of $112, $318, and $215 that were placed for collection with the different 
collection agents. Applicant admitted in his Answer to the SOR that the accounts remain 
delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts to contact 
the creditors or collection agents to resolve them. The accounts have not been resolved. 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of any financial 
counseling. There is no evidence that Applicant ever contacted his creditors or collection 
agents either to research and validate the accounts, or to arrange repayment plans. There 
is no evidence that Applicant ever disputed the accounts either with the creditors or the 
credit reporting agencies. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his financial 
situation is now under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”5 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”6   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
5 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
6 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”7 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced substantial 
evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant has the 
burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or 
mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.8  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”9  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”10 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
7 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
10 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. Applicant’s credit reports reflect eight delinquent accounts. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 
and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”11 
                                                          
11 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” 
I have concluded that none of the mitigating factors apply. Rather than addressing 
the eight accounts, Applicant simply took no action to resolve them, claiming he had 
insufficient funds to do so. The Government is entitled to rely on credit reports in these 
proceedings as ordinary business record exceptions to the hearsay rule. There was no 
evidence submitted “to establish that those documents were improperly or irregularly 
produced, or produced in circumstances that would render their reliability suspect.”12 
Moreover, with respect to credit reports, the Appeal Board stated:13 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations . . . At that point, the 
burden shifts to Applicant to establish either that [he or she] is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. 
Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without further action, are insufficient. 
 
There is no good-faith effort to contact the creditors to resolve the accounts.14 
There is no evidence that the conditions that may have resulted in the financial issues 
                                                          
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 07-08925 at 3 (App. Bd. September 15, 2008). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006). 
 
14 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
 
8 
                                      
 
were largely beyond Applicant=s control. There is no evidence of financial counseling, a 
budget, or any disputes. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his financial 
situation is now under control. Equally as important, there is no evidence that Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances, and that failure to do so continues to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.15 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.16   
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no evidence of 
misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected information. He has 
been employed by the same employer continuously since April 2015, but previously 
worked for it for several months in 2014.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There are eight delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR with a combined 
unpaid balance of $11,707. Although Applicant was questioned about the delinquent 
accounts by the OPM investigator in September 2015, he made no efforts since that time 
to address any of his delinquent accounts, including one with the modest sum of $112. 
He failed to dispute any of them. It appears that he simply ignored the debts, choosing 
                                                          
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
16 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
instead to focus on his current accounts. Considering the lack of evidence regarding his 
current finances, and the absence of character evidence regarding Applicant’s honesty, 
integrity, and trustworthiness, I am unable to reach a positive conclusion pertaining to 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:17 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a very poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, avoiding the debts in his name, and failing to promise to take any 
corrective actions. Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
