 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 15-04803 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has greater connections to the United States than to India. Applicant, 
his spouse, and his two children are citizens and residents of the United States. They 
are not citizens or residents of India. His financial connections to the United States, not 
including his U.S. employment, are about four times greater than his connections to 
India. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2014, Applicant signed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 2. On April 18, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B 
(foreign influence). Item 1. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
On May 3, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not 
request a hearing. Item 1. On August 23, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of Relevant Material (FORM). On September 6, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, 
and he did not respond to the FORM. On October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to 
me. The case file consists of five exhibits. Items 1-5. Applicant did not object to any of 
the Government exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or 
after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
India. Item 5. The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for 
those facts. Department Counsel’s AN request is quoted at pages 5-6 infra, with 
footnotes in the original omitted and minor grammatical changes. The first two 
paragraphs were based on State Department documents and one White House 
document.2 AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can 
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning India.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).   
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf. 
  
2 U.S. Department of State, U.S. Relations With India, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, 
Fact Sheet (Oct. 9, 2015), http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3454.htm; U.S. Department of State, 
Background Note, India (Apr. 17, 2012), http://www.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/india/200052.htm; The White 
House website, Office of the Press Secretary, U.S.-India Joint Statement, “Shared Effort; Progress for 
All,” (Jan. 25, 2015), https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/25/us-india-joint-statement-
shared-effort-progress-all.   
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact3 
 
The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.a that Applicant owns real estate in India valued at about 
$195,000; and in ¶¶ 1.b through 1.g that his father, mother, sister, brother, father-in-law, 
and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of India. Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations, and he provided extenuating and mitigating information. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor.4 He entered the 
United States on a H1B visa to work for the DOD. For the past 17 years, DOD 
contractors have employed him primarily as a systems analyst, manager, and senior 
software engineer. There is no evidence of violations of his employer’s rules, abuse of 
alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. He has not served in the United States or Indian military. 
Applicant’s spouse was born in India, and she was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2014. 
Applicant and his spouse married in India in 2001. Their children were born in the 
United States in 2003 and 2006. 
 
Applicant was born in India. In 1993, he received a bachelor’s degree in India, 
and in 1995, he received a master’s degree in India. He completed some post-master’s 
degree computer courses in India from 1995 to 1996. In 1998, he emigrated from India 
to the United States, and in November 2014, he became a U.S. citizen. He traveled to 
India in 2008, 2009, 2012, and 2013, and for three of the four trips, he stayed in India 
for 21 to 30 days.    
 
Applicant has weekly contact with his father, mother, and brother. He has 
quarterly contact with his sister, father-in-law, and mother-in-law. His father retired in 
2003 from an Indian state government position, and he is receiving an Indian state 
government retirement pension. None of his other family members are or were 
employees of the Indian Government.    
 
Under Indian law, dual citizenship is not permitted.5 Applicant is a U.S. citizen, 
and he is not a citizen of India. He received a renunciation certificate from India. Item 2. 
Applicant, his spouse, and his children are exclusively U.S. citizens. 
  
Applicant inherited a house in India in 1997.6 In 2006, Applicant and his spouse 
inherited land in India worth $50,000. In 2010, he purchased a home in India worth 
                                            
3 To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
4 Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the facts in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs 
are Applicant’s response to the statement of reasons and November 25, 2014 Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Items 1, 2.  
 
5 See Embassy of the United States, New Delhi, India, Dual Nationality: India and the United 
States, http://newdelhi.usembassy.gov/acsdualnation.html.  
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
$100,000, which his parents are using. In 2015, he sold the house he inherited in 1997. 
From 2010 to 2017, the Indian rupee to U.S. dollar exchange rate declined about 25 
percent, substantially reducing the value of Applicant’s properties in India. The value of 
Applicant’s properties in India is estimated to be about $150,000. Applicant emphasized 
that his security clearance is more important than his property interests in India, and he 
offered to divest his ownership of this property in India. Item 4.  
 
Applicant owns a home in the United States valued at $260,000, a $125,000 
savings account, and a $180,000 retirement account, for a total U.S. net worth of 
$565,000. Item 2. Applicant emphasized that his “life and future are in the United 
States.” Item 1 at 2. He did not disclose his U.S. annual income or his spouse’s annual 
U.S. income or financial assets. He promised to resolve any conflict that might arise in 
favor of the United States. Item 1 at 3. 
 
India 
 
India is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 
1.2 billion people. The U.S. and India share common values including the rule of law, 
respect for diversity, and democratic government. The U.S. Department of State 
reported in 2012 that bilateral defense and counterterrorism cooperation between the 
U.S. and India had grown to reach unprecedented levels. In 2009, the United States 
and India launched the U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue, which is a bilateral forum focused 
on strengthening cooperation between the two countries in several areas, including 
energy, climate change, trade, education, and counterterrorism. The United States 
supports a reformed United Nations Security Council that includes India as a permanent 
member. The United States is one of India’s largest trade and investment partners. The 
United States supports India’s emergence as a rising world power. Recently, India has 
taken actions to ease travel between the United States and India. 
 
On January 25, 2015, President Obama and Indian Prime Minister Modi held a 
joint press conference in India. They lauded the close and growing ties between the 
United States and India. President Obama emphasized the following elements of the 
United States—India relationship: (1) the natural partnership between two great 
democracies; (2) the new Declaration of Friendship formalizing that partnership; (3) 
increasing bilateral trade in goods and services between the two countries approaching 
$100 billion; (4) breakthroughs in nuclear cooperation; (5) additional export reforms; (6) 
pursuit of investment treaties; (7) launching joint projects to reduce pollution and slow 
climate change; (8) partnerships in security matters in Afghanistan and in preventing 
Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons; and (9) most importantly in the context of this 
case, deepening defense and security cooperation. On January 11, 2015, Secretary of 
State John Kerry underscored the positive aspects of the United States—India 
association, including the growing investments of Indian citizens in the United States 
(now 9 billion dollars), and U.S. citizens’ investments in India (now 28 billion dollars).      
 
                                                                                                                                            
6 Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. 
Item 1. 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage identifies India, along with seven other countries, as being involved 
in economic and industrial espionage. An earlier version of that report included the 
results of a private industry survey in which the National Counterintelligence Center 
surveyed nearly a dozen Fortune 500 companies. The companies specifically named 
India as being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information. India remained on the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative’s Priority 
Watch List in 2015, based on its history of trademark counterfeiting and copyright 
piracy-including one of the highest rates of video piracy in the world-and concerns 
regarding patents and regulatory data protection. Of particular concern is counterfeit 
pharmaceuticals produced in India and shipped to the United States, posing serious risk 
to American consumers.  
 
In its 2009-2011 Report to Congress, the Office of the National 
Counterintelligence Executive reported that that sensitive U.S. economic information 
and technology are targeted by the intelligence services, private sector, and citizens of 
dozens of other countries. “Some U.S. allies and partners use their broad access to 
U.S. institutions to acquire sensitive U.S. economic and technology information, 
primarily through aggressive elicitation and other human intelligence (HUMINT) tactics. 
Some of these states have advanced cyber capabilities.”  
 
According to the U.S. Department of Justice, there have been numerous, recent 
criminal cases concerning export enforcement, economic espionage, theft of trade 
secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving both the government of 
India and private companies and individuals in India.[7] In November 2011, an employee 
of a Utah-based scientific company, who is an Indian citizen with a work visa and alien 
registration card, was charged with stealing company proprietary information for use by 
a relative in India. He subsequently pleaded guilty on May 11, 2012, to a single count of 
unlawful access to a protected computer. In January 2013, the former export control 
manager of a Pennsylvania-based company pleaded guilty to the illegal, unlicensed 
export to India and China of over 57 microwave amplifiers, products that have military 
applications, and was sentenced to 42 months in prison, three years of supervised 
release, and a fine. In April 2014, six foreign nationals were indicted in federal court in 
Illinois for an alleged conspiracy to bribe Indian government officials to allow the mining 
of titanium materials under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. In April 2015, the former 
owner of a New Jersey-based defense contracting business pleaded guilty to illegally 
exporting military blueprints to India without a license or prior State Department 
approval. In April 2016, she was sentenced to 57 months in prison.  
 
India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect 
U.S. citizens. The Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir remain unstable, and a number 
of terrorist groups operate there, particularly along the Line of Control separating India 
and Pakistani-controlled Kashmir. The State Department strongly recommends avoiding 
travel to the states of Jammu and Kashmir.   
 
                                            
7 There is no evidence that Applicant or any of his family members are or were involved in any 
criminal activity. As such this paragraph and the next paragraph have limited relevance. 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Anti-Western terrorist groups, including some on the U.S. Government’s list of 
foreign terrorist organizations, are active in India, including Islamist extremist groups 
such as Harkat-ul-Jihad-i-Islami, Harakat ul-Mujahidin, India Mujahideen, Jaish-e-
Mohammed, and Lashkar-e Tayyiba. India remains subject to violent terrorist attacks, 
including operations launched by Maoist insurgents and transnational groups based in 
Pakistan. In September 2015, police in Assam killed two Dima Halam Daogah (DHD-A) 
militant leaders. In December 2015, media reported that Indian officials identified former 
Uttar Pradesh resident Sanaul Haq (aka Maulana Asim Umar) as the head of al-Qa'ida 
in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS). Since September 2015, Bangladesh has 
experienced a series of increasingly sophisticated violent attacks. These include the 
murders of two foreign nationals, as well as bombs and other attacks against gatherings 
of religious groups and security forces. ISIL publicly claimed credit for many of these 
attacks. Additionally, groups claiming to represent al-Qa'ida in the Indian Subcontinent 
(AQIS) asserted responsibility for a series of threats and terrorist attacks targeting 
writers, publishers, and others in the media, including the murder of a U.S. citizen 
blogger. 
 
According to the State Department, the most significant human rights problems in 
India as of 2014 were “police and security force abuses, including extrajudicial killings, 
torture, and rape; widespread corruption that contributed to ineffective responses to 
crime, including those against women and members of scheduled castes or tribes; and 
societal violence based on gender, religious affiliation, and caste or tribe.” Other human 
rights problems included “disappearances, hazardous prison conditions, arbitrary arrest 
and detention, and lengthy pretrial detention.” Rape, domestic violence, dowry-related 
deaths, honor killings, sexual harassment, and discrimination against women remain 
serious problems. A lack of accountability for misconduct at all levels of government 
persists. Investigations and prosecutions of individual cases takes place, but lax 
enforcement, a shortage of trained police officers, and an overburdened and under-
resourced court system contribute to infrequent convictions.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant was born and educated through his master’s degree in India. His 
spouse was born in India. His mother, father, brother, sister, mother-in-law, and father-
in-law, and other more distant relatives, such as nieces and nephews, are citizens and 
residents of India. He has frequent8 contact with his parents, brother, and parents-in-law 
residing in India. Applicant traveled to India in 2008, 2009, 2012, and 2013, and for 
three of the four trips, he stayed in India for 21 to 30 days.      
 
Applicant’s property interests in India have a fair market value of about $150,000. 
Applicant has “a substantial . . . property interest in a foreign country . . . which could 
subject the [Applicant] to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” See 
generally ISCR Case No. 12-00120 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2014) (affirming denial of 
security clearance in FORM case because of applicant’s connections to India and 
noting administrative judge’s findings of heightened risk in relation to family 
relationships and property interests of $345,000 in India without any information about 
                                            
8 See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
assets in the United States). See also ISCR Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 
2011) (finding “presence in India of close family members, viewed in light of that 
country’s troubles with terrorism and its human rights abuses, and his sharing living 
quarters with a person (his wife) having foreign family contacts, establish the 
‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).    
 
Applicant lives with and is close to his spouse. His spouse has relatives living in 
India. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 
at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect influence 
from a spouse’s relatives living in India could result in a security concern. In addition, 
Applicant has ties of affection to some relatives in India even through his 
communications are infrequent. See ISCR Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 
2011) (finding “presence in India of close family members, viewed in light of that 
country’s troubles with terrorism and its human rights abuses, and his sharing living 
quarters with a person (his spouse) having foreign family contacts, establish the 
‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).    
 
Applicant’s relationships with residents of India create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help relatives living in India. For example, if terrorists, government officials, or other 
entities in India wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on 
his relatives living in India. Applicant would then be subject to coercion through his 
connections to India and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
Applicant and his spouse’s possessions of close family ties with their families 
living in India, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant or their spouse has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a 
foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case 
No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of India with the United States, places some, but not an 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his and his 
spouse’s relationships with family members living in India do not pose a security risk. 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist relatives in India. 
  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from India 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his 
spouse, or their relatives living in India, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and India has a problem 
with terrorism. Applicant and his spouse’s relationships with family members living in 
India create a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently 
close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist relatives in India by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant and his spouse’s relationships with their families living in India. Department 
Counsel has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) has some applicability. Applicant has frequent contacts with some of 
his relatives living in India. Applicant’s spouse has relatives living in India. Loyalty to, 
support for, and connections to family are positive character traits. However, for security 
clearance purposes, those same relationships negate the possibility of full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is little 
likelihood that his relationships with relatives in India could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. Applicant, his spouse, and his two children are 
citizens and residents of the United States. When Applicant and his spouse took an 
oath and swore allegiance to the United States, as part of their naturalization as U.S. 
citizens, and when he volunteered to assist the U.S. Government as a contractor, he 
manifested his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other 
countries. When he and his spouse became U.S. citizens they lost their citizenship to 
India because India does not recognize dual citizenship.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family living in India. There 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Indian government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, his spouse, or their 
relatives living in India to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.9 As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant, his spouse, or their relatives living in 
India would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. Of 
course, the primary risk to their relatives living in India is from terrorists and other 
lawless elements and not the Indian government. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in India. 
Applicant and his spouse’s relatives living in India could become potential targets of 
terrorists because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential 
access to classified information could theoretically add some risk to them from lawless 
elements in India. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with anyone living in India. Applicant is not required to report his 
contacts with citizens or residents of India.  
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies and mitigates security concerns arising from Applicant’s 
property located in India. Applicant has a substantial investment in India with property 
interests in India having a fair market value of about $150,000. Applicant’s net worth in 
the United States is about $565,000 without including the value of his vehicle(s) or 
Applicant’s U.S. salary, which are also important economic components of his 
connections to the United States. There is no evidence of his spouse’s economic 
connections to the United States; however, it is reasonable to infer she has some. His 
and his spouse’s U.S. economic connections are sufficient in magnitude to fully negate 
his India financial connections as a security concern.     
 
In sum, Applicant and his spouse’s connections to their relatives living in India 
are significant. They are sufficiently close to family in India to raise a security concern. 
He traveled to India four times in the last ten years. His property interests in India are 
valued at about $150,000. Security concerns are not analyzed in a piecemeal 
assessment. Instead, the overall situation must be considered. Applicant’s spouse and 
two children are citizens and residents of the United States. Applicant and his spouse 
have parents and siblings who are living in India, and Applicant’s father was employed 
by the Indian Government or state government until he retired in 2003. Applicant and 
his spouse and children are U.S. citizens. His net worth in the United States is 
estimated to be $565,000. His financial connections to the United States are almost four 
times greater than his connections to India without including the value of Applicant and 
his spouse’s salaries. Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are 
mitigated. Even if foreign influence security concerns were not mitigated under AG ¶ 
8(b), security concerns would be mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.     
                                            
9 There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration” of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He entered the 
United States on a H1B visa and he has worked for the DOD for the past 17 years 
primarily as a systems analyst, manager, and senior software engineer. There is no 
evidence of violations of his employer’s rules, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs.  
 
Applicant has significant connections to India. Applicant and his spouse were 
born in India. Applicant was educated in India through the master’s degree level. 
Applicant’s parents, parents-in-law, brother, sister, and several more distant relatives 
are citizens and residents of India. The Indian Government does not employ any of his 
relatives. His father retired from a state government position in India in 2003, and he 
receives a pension from an Indian state government. He frequently communicates with 
several relatives living in India and has bonds of affection and loyalty to them. His 
property in India is valued at $150,000. He traveled to India four times in the past 10 
years. 
Applicant and his spouse were naturalized as U.S. citizens in 2014, and they 
automatically lost their Indian citizenship. Their children were born in the United States. 
Applicant is willing to divest himself of his property in India if security officials ask him to 
do so. His net worth in the United States is about $565,000. He has worked for a DOD 
contractor for 17 years. His U.S. salary is an important component of his economic 
connection to the United States. Applicant emphasized that his “life and future are in the 
United States.” Item 1 at 2. He promised to resolve any conflict that might arise in favor 
of the United States.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
person. I conclude that foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
