 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06663 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) in effect 
on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and became 
effective that day. I considered both sets of guidelines in reaching this decision, and it 
would be the same under either set.  
 
On May 9, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR in writing (Answer) and elected 
to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1) On August 9, 
2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
seven Items, and mailed it to Applicant on August 10, 2016. She received the FORM on 
August 23, 2016, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information.  
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant timely submitted a letter to the FORM (Reply) that I marked as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. In the Reply, she did not object to the Government’s evidence, or submit 
additional documentary evidence. The Government had no objection to AE A. All exhibits 
are admitted into evidence. On May 22, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the 17 allegations in the SOR. (Item 1) After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old and divorced since 2005. She has an eight-year-old 
daughter. She served in the Air Force from March 1999 until March 2008, when she 
separated with an Honorable discharge. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began after her 2005 divorce and later received 
orders to serve in Europe in 2006. After separating from service in 2008 she was hired 
as a civilian at a U.S. agency, operating in Europe. She became pregnant and did not 
have medical insurance. In 2009, she was terminated from that employment and was 
then unemployed. She remained in Europe until after the birth of her child, and relied on 
financial support from friends for many months. After returning home, she learned that 
her former husband had not been paying the mortgage on their home, which resulted in 
its foreclosure. She stated that being a single parent, with periods of unemployment, 
made it difficult to pay her bills. (Items 1, 2, 7) It is unclear when Applicant began her 
current position with a defense contractor, although it appears that she is working in the 
Middle East with a contractor. (Item 1) 
 
On January 1, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2) In response to questions about financial 
delinquencies, she disclosed a garnishment, delinquent student loans, and a foreclosure. 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from January 2014, June 2015, and March 2016, 
the SOR alleged 17 debts, including the foreclosure, which totaled $277,619 and became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2015.  
 
On February 11, 2014, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator 
about her background and information included in her e-QIP. During that interview, she 
discussed various matters, including most of the SOR debts. (Item 6) 
 
Applicant submitted evidence documenting the resolution of the following six SOR 
debts: ¶ 1.c – a payday loan for $1,289 was paid in June 2016 (Answer); ¶ 1.e – an 
overpayment of $809 on an education loan was paid in June 2016 (Answer); ¶ 1.f – an 
overpayment of $750 on an education loan was paid in June 2016 (Answer); ¶ 1.g – a 
utility bill for $575 was paid in June 2016 (Answer); ¶ 1.j – a utility bill for $81 was paid in 
June 2016 (Answer); and ¶ 1.k – a $23,811 defaulted student loan is being paid through 
automatic monthly payments of $326. Applicant began those payments in February 2016. 
She submitted evidence of five payments. (Answer) 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant stated that she paid and resolved most of the remaining 12 debts or was 
paying them. She did not provide documentary evidence to confirm those statements in 
either her Answer or Reply. In particular, she did not provide evidence that she resolved 
a deficiency on the defaulted mortgage on her foreclosed home, alleged in ¶ 1.a. Nor did 
she provide evidence addressing the status of a large student loan listed in ¶ 1.b. 
  
    Applicant did not submit evidence that she obtained credit or financial counseling, 
or sought other assistance to resolve the delinquent debts. She did not provide a budget 
demonstrating financial stability and ability to pay debts.   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AGs. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny 
of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 sets out the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Between 2011 and 2015, Applicant accumulated 17 delinquent accounts totaling 
over $277,000, many of which remain unresolved. That ongoing pattern of inability or 
unwillingness to pay lawful debts, raises security concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
                                            
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 20 provides three conditions that could mitigate the security concerns 
established in this case: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
          AG ¶ 20(b) provides some mitigation of the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems can be attributed to her divorce in 2005, a pregnancy without medical insurance, 
living abroad, and periods of unemployment. Those were circumstances beyond her 
control. In order to establish full mitigation under this condition, Applicant must provide 
evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances, which she did not do. The 
evidence does not establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) because she did not provide 
evidence that she received financial counseling, and that her financial problems and all 
SOR-listed debts are under control. Applicant provided documentation that she made a 
good–faith effort to resolve six of the SOR-listed debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 AG ¶ 2(a) requires an administrative judge to evaluate an applicant’s national 
security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances, commonly referred to as the whole-person concept. Under AG ¶ 2(c) the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must include 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. The administrative judge should also consider the 
following nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 37-year-old 
woman, who honorably served in the Air Force for almost ten years. Subsequently, she 
began accumulating significant debt that remains unresolved and includes a defaulted 
mortgage and student loans. Although she stated she does not owe any mortgage 
deficiency after the foreclosure sale, she failed to provide proof of that assertion. She did 
not submit proof of making payments on a large student loan. In its FORM, Department 
Counsel clearly pointed out that the documents she submitted with her Answer did not 
resolve the SOR allegations. Despite being on notice of the Government’s concern, she 
failed to submit additional evidence with her Reply. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with doubts as to Applicant’s national security eligibility. Applicant did not meet her 
burden to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:          Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:                       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:                       Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.g:          For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:           Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k:          For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.l through 1.o:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
