 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-06882  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $13,000 in newly delinquent debt after discharging 
previous debt through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2007. Resulting security concerns were 
not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 26, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. 
(Item 2.) On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
August 16, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 18, 2016, and received by him on August 25, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not 
file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond 
the 30-day period he was afforded. Items 1 through 5 are admitted. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 35 years old, and has worked for a mining and chemical processing 
company since June 2001. He has applied for a position with a defense contractor, 
which is contingent on him obtaining national security eligibility. He is a high school 
graduate. He was divorced in 2012, after ten years of marriage, and has five children 
ranging from 6 to 14 years of age. He has no prior military service or Federal civilian 
employment. This is his first application for a security clearance. (Item 2.)  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.w, with some explanations, and denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.x. (Item 1.) 
Applicant’s 2007 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and delinquent debts are also documented in 
record credit bureau reports from 2014 and 2016. (Items 4 and 5.)  
 
 Applicant reported on his security clearance application, and confirmed in his 
answer to the SOR, that he failed to file his 2011 Federal and state income tax returns 
as required. His answer included copies of Federal and state returns for that year, which 
were professionally prepared by a Certified Public Accountant and signed during March 
2012. It appears that Applicant’s disclosure was based on his failure to include some of 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
his earnings that year for payments under the Family Paid Medical Leave Act, which he 
erroneously thought were non-taxable, resulting in about $1,200 in unpaid taxes. He 
claimed that he would resolve these back taxes through various means, but provided no 
documentation that he had done so. (Item 1; Item 2.)  
 
 In his July 2016 answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that he had recently 
resolved the three debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.m, and 1.v, totaling $1,777. He asked 
“for an extension so I can support the statements above with documentation.” (Item 1.) 
He did not submit any documentation in support of those claims during the 30-day 
period, ending September 24, 2016, which was provided for his response to the FORM. 
 
 Applicant’s 22 SOR-alleged debts became delinquent between 2010 and 2014, 
and totaled more than $14,000. In addition to the 3 debts discussed above, Applicant 
admitted that 17 debts, totaling $10,443 (alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e, 1.g through 
1.l, and 1.n through 1.u), remain unresolved. Five of those debts were for less than $50. 
(Item 1; Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that he resolved the $375 debt that 
became delinquent in 2010, and was placed for collection in 2011, through a 2012 
settlement payment for less than the full balance due. This debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.w. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that the $1,830 collection account, 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x, was erroneously reported to the credit bureau. This debt is 
resolved. (Item1.)    
 
 Applicant provided no explanation or justification for his nonpayment of his 
outstanding delinquent debts, and no evidence of his willingness or ability to resolve 
them. He did not document any financial counseling or provide budget information from 
which to predict his future solvency. He offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning his character or trustworthiness, the quality of his professional performance, 
the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling 
sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate 
his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case 
decided without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent adjudicative guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns, or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed since 2001, yet incurred more than 
$13,000 in new delinquent debts after discharging his previous debts through Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 2007. He was unable or unwilling to repay most of these debts, and failed 
to explain why they remain delinquent. These financial issues date back to 2010, and 
continue. Five of the unresolved debts involve less than $50. He timely filed, but failed 
to properly report and pay some of his 2011 Federal and state income taxes. These 
facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift 
the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant admittedly continues to owe more than $10,000 for debts that became 
delinquent between 2010 and 2014. He claimed, but did not document, that he had 
resolved over $3,000 in additional tax and consumer debt. He offered no reasonable 
basis to conclude that such problems will not recur, so mitigation was not established 
under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant neither asserted nor documented that his delinquent debts arose from 
conditions that were beyond his control, or that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He also failed to provide 
evidence of financial counseling or efforts to resolve the debts that could establish 
mitigation under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant documented a legitimate basis to dispute the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.x, because it was erroneously reported to the credit bureau as a collection account. 
Mitigation of security concerns relating to this debt was established under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Applicant documented that he timely filed his 2011 Federal and state income tax 
returns. However, he provided several different explanations for how he would resolve 
his estimated $1,200 in unpaid taxes for that year, and failed to provide documentation 
of compliance with any repayment arrangement. Full mitigation of resulting security 
concerns was not established under AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $10,000 in 
delinquent debt that he has accumulated over the past seven years, and either cannot 
or chooses not to repay. These delinquencies were incurred following his 2007 Chapter 
7 bankruptcy discharge, demonstrating an absence of rehabilitation or permanent 
behavioral changes. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress from his financial 
situation remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.v:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.w and 1.x:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
