 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )       ISCR Case: 15-08892  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 20, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant owes approximately $32,000 in delinquent debts that she has not repaid 
or otherwise resolved. Applicant did not show that her financial difficulties are under 
control. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 13, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On April 28, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 1, 2016, and requested that her case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). (Item 
1.) On June 27, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items,1 was mailed 
to Applicant, and received by her on July 14, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that she 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit additional 
information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection to its contents, and did 
not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period she was afforded. The 
case was assigned to me on May 10, 2017. Items 1 through 3 are admitted into the record. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions2 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and unmarried. Applicant has one child. She has worked 
for a Federal contractor since October 2014. Applicant was unemployed from April 2013 
through April 2014. (Item 2.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
                                                 
1 Department Counsel submitted four Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It will 
not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant 
conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on September 28, 2015. Applicant 
did not adopt the summary as her own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20, Report of Investigation summaries are inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. 
In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted the existence of the debts set forth in all of the 
allegations in the SOR, with explanations. (Item 2.) The debts are documented in the 
credit bureau report in the record dated August 29, 2015. (Item 3.)  
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing a medical creditor $18 for a past-due debt. She 
stated in her Answer, “This was once on my credit report, but now it was either paid or 
over 7 [years] old and was removed.” No further information was provided. This debt is 
not resolved. 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing $175 to a creditor for a past-due debt. She stated in 
her Answer, “This was once on my credit report, but now it was either paid or over 7 
[years] old and was removed.” No other information was provided. This debt is not 
resolved. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing $495 to a creditor for a past-due debt. She stated in 
her Answer, “This was once on my credit report, but now it was either paid or over 7 
[years] old and was removed.” No other information was provided. This debt is not 
resolved. 
  
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing $199 to a medical creditor for a past-due debt. She 
stated in her Answer, “This is a medical bill from 6/6/11, and I was laid off at the time and 
I thought my insurance carrier had paid it before my coverage ended.” No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing $12,997 to a creditor for a past-due debt. She states 
that this debt is the same as the ones set forth in allegations 1.f, and 1.g. The account 
number and the amount of the debt is the same for this allegation and 1.f. They are for 
an unpaid student loan. (Item 3 at 10.) I find that 1.e and 1.f are the same debt. As further 
discussed below, 1.g is a different debt to a different creditor. No other information was 
provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing $12,997 to a creditor for a past-due debt. As stated, 
I find that this debt is the same as that set forth in 1.e, above. Because it refers to a 
duplicate debt, this allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing $8,686 to a creditor for a past-due debt. As stated, 
this is not the same debt as that discussed under 1.e and 1.f, above. Applicant stated in 
her e-QIP that this debt is for a repossessed automobile. She also stated, “When I was 
unemployed I got behind in all of my bills.” (Item 2 at Section 26.) The credit report in the 
record states that this is a “charged-off” account. (Item 3 at 12.) No other information was 
provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $118 for a past-due debt. She stated in 
her Answer, “This was once on my credit report, but now it was either paid or over 7 
[years] old and was removed.” No further information was provided. The debt is not 
resolved.  
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted owing $115 for a past-due medical debt. She stated in her 
Answer, “I’m planning on paying this balance off by setting up payment arrangements 
with the creditor.” No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing $8,020 for a past-due debt involving a second 
repossessed automobile. She stated in her e-QIP that she was going to contact this 
creditor. (Item 2 at Section 26.) She further stated in her Answer, “I’m planning on paying 
this balance off by setting up payment arrangements with the creditor.” No further 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing $1,554 to a telephone provider for a past-due debt. 
She stated in her Answer, “I’m planning on paying this balance off by setting up payment 
arrangements with the creditor.” No further information was provided. This debt is not 
resolved. 
 
     With regard to her debts in general Applicant stated in her Answer, “I’m looking for 
a bankruptcy attorney to see if filing for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy would be the best thing 
for me to do.” She submitted no information showing that she had retained bankruptcy 
counsel. Applicant did not submit any documentation that she has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. Applicant did not submit any information concerning her 
current income, expenses, or ability to pay her past-due debts and be financially secure 
going forward. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of her job performance. 
She submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
 
 
5 
 
 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
 
6 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has been employed since 2014. She has a considerable number of past-
due debts that she has not resolved. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant continues to owe past-due commercial debt to various creditors in the 
amount of approximately $32,377. Applicant elected not to provide any evidence that her 
situation has improved. Therefore, there is no reasonable basis to conclude that such 
problems will not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant was unemployed for about a year between April 2013 and April 2014. 
She did not show how she had acted responsibly to resolve her debts after obtaining 
employment again. Mitigation is not established under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
No evidence of financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Further, there are 
no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant 
elected to submit no information showing that she had paid or resolved any of her debts, 
including the smallest ones. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of 
financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Applicant did not mitigate her delinquent debt issues. As stated above, SOR 
allegation 1.f is found for Applicant because it is a duplicate debt. With that exception, 
Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to owe more 
than $32,000 in bad debts, and did not show any plan for resolving that substantial 
indebtedness or otherwise showing that such issues will not recur in the future. The 
potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence 
creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. She failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
