1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-08485 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrea M. Correlas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate drug 
involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
The case file shows that Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on January 11, 2010. (Item 5, 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI))1 The case file does not contain information to indicate 
that Applicant had submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) to trigger the interview, or why Applicant did not receive a security clearance at 
that time. There is evidence that Applicant may not have required eligibility for access to 
classified information at that time since he continued to work for the same defense 
contractor that is now sponsoring him for a security clearance.  
The case file shows that Applicant submitted an e-QIP on February 16, 2012 
(Item 4), to obtain a security clearance required for a position with the defense 
contractor. The February 12, 2012 e-QIP does not appear to have been processed. 
Applicant submitted another e-QIP on February 5, 2015 (Item 3). Applicant was 
interviewed again by an OPM security investigator on June 17, 2016. (Item 5) 
1 The three PSIs are attached to Item 5, Response to Interrogatories. 
10/23/2017
2 
 
Department Counsel sent Applicant an interrogatory concerning drug misuse which 
Applicant answered on June 17, 2016 (Item 5). 
 
After reviewing the results of the background investigations and the responses to 
the interrogatoies, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. On August 8, 2016, DOD issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for drug 
involvement under Guideline H. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 14, 2016. He admitted the SOR 
allegation of daily marijuana use from August 2002 to September 2009, use of 
marijuana between five and 15 times in July 2015, and use of marijuana as recently as 
April 2016. (SOR 1.a). He admitted the SOR allegation that he purchased marijuana 
(SOR 1.b). He also admitted that in July 2015 and April 2016, he used marijuana after 
having been granted a security clearance in April 2012 (SOR 1.c). However, Applicant 
denied the SOR allegation that he was arrested in August 2007 for possession of drug 
paraphernalia. Applicant claims he was not arrested but received a citation for the 
offense. He admits he was sentenced to one year supervised probation, to perform 
community service, and he received a fine. (SOR 1.d) Applicant elected to have the 
matter decided on the written record. (Item 2)  
 
 Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on October 31, 
2016. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on November 8, 
2016, and he was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. (Item 6) Applicant did not 
provided additional information in response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on 
October 1, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs, and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.  
 
 
 
 
Procedural Issues 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSIs (Item 5) were 
not authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further 
advised that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summaries to 
make them clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summaries as 
not authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no 
objections were raised to the summaries, the administrative judge could determine that 
he waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summaries. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM, so he did not object to consideration of the PSIs. Since Applicant 
did not object to consideration of the PSIs, I will consider the information in them in my 
decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 32-years-old. He graduated from high school in June 2004. He attended 
technical school for about 18 months but did not receive a degree or certificate. He 
married in March 2010 and has two children. He has worked for defense contractors 
since April 2009 as a computer technician. Prior to that time, he worked various jobs 
and had periods of unemployment. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated February 5, 2015) 
   
Applicant admits, in response to question 23 of the February 16, 2012 e-QIP, that 
he purchased and used marijuana several times a day from August 2002 until 
September 2009. He also reported that he realized his error using illegal drugs and left 
the drug lifestyle. He stated that he does not intend to go back to using illegal drugs 
because he was a husband and father. (Item 3, February 2, 2012, at 32-33)  
 
Applicant was interviewed by an OPM security investigator on January 11, 2010. 
He told the investigator that he first used marijuana in August 2000 and used about 
three times a week until August 2007. He received pleasure from smoking marijuana. 
His use did not cause him any issues and he was not diagnosed as a drug abuser. He 
failed a drug test for a job and was not hired because of the positive results. He also 
told the investigator that he was not arrested for having drug paraphernalia but only 
received a citation. (Item 5, January 11, 2010 Interview at 3) 
 
Applicant did not list any illegal drug use on the e-QIP he submitted on February 
5, 2015, because he believed his marijuana use was more than seven years previous. 
However, in the August 3, 2015 interview with the OPM agent, he admitted his daily use 
of marijuana from August 2002 until September 2008, and the failed drug test in 2007. 
He also again stated his intent not to use marijuana in the future. (Item 5, August 3, 
2015 PSI, at 7) 
 
In his response to the interrogatory from Department Counsel, Applicant admitted 
his use of marijuana from 2006 until September 2009. He admitted using marijuana less 
than 15 times in July 2015 and once in April 2016. He again said he did not intend to 
4 
 
use marijuana in the future. (Item 5, Response to Interrogatories, dated January 17, 
2016) 
 
Applicant admitted his use of marijuana in his response to the SOR. He stated 
that from 2000 to 2009, he was living the wrong lifestyle. His actions were idiotic and 
selfish. He was wrong and he made poor choices. He corrected his life style and now 
works hard to safeguard classified data. (Item 2, Response to SOR, dated September 
14, 2016) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
5 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decision shall be “in terms of eh national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1 (b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified and sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The illegal use of a controlled substance to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or 
mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 
U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. (AG ¶ 24) 
 
Applicant admits that he purchased marijuana and used the illegal drug daily 
from August 2002 until September 2009. He also admitted to using marijuana about 15 
times in July 2015, and once as recently as April 2016. He had been granted eligibility 
for access to classified or sensitive information in April 2012. Thus, his use of marijuana 
in July 2015 and April 2016 was after being granted a security clearance. Applicant 
denied he was arrested for possessing drug paraphernalia. He does admit that he 
received a citation for possession of drug paraphernalia, appearing in court on the 
charge, and was sentenced. Applicant’s response that he was not arrested but only 
received a citation is a distinction without a difference. Marijuana is a controlled 
substance. These facts raise the following Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions 
under AG ¶ 25: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; and  
 
(c) iIlegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.  
 
 I considered the following Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
6 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome his 
problems, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any further involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant used marijuana daily for seven 
years, used again 15 times in one month just two years ago, and once just a year ago. 
His use last year and two years ago was while he had eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant stopped using marijuana for a time but relapsed into use in 2015 
and 2016. This made his drug misuse frequent, recent, and deliberate.  
 
 Other than Applicant’s statements that he does not intend to use marijuana in the 
future, there are no indications that he has stopped using illegal drugs. Applicant did not 
execute an agreement that he would not misuse controlled substances again. The only 
evidence of his intent is his statement. Applicant has not provided sufficient information 
for me to be convinced that he has stopped misusing marijuana and will not use the 
illegal drug in the future. There is no evidence of the extent of his participating in and 
the results of drug treatment and counseling programs. There are no evaluations from 
counselors as to his prognosis for not using illegal drugs in the future. He did not 
present any evidence that would bolster or corroborate his non-use of marijuana. His 
misuse could start at any time. Since Applicant provided no documentation to verify that 
he no longer uses illegal drugs or evidence that he successfully completed a drug 
abuse treatment program, his statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future is 
unreliable. Applicant has failed to mitigate drug involvement security concerns. 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant admitted substance 
misuse from August 2002 until September 2009, and then again in 2015 and 2016. He 
presented no evidence of counseling and rehabilitation. He stated an intent to not use 
marijuana in the future, but after the statement he relapsed into marijuana use in 2015 
and 2016. Overall, these facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated drug 
involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
TH0MAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
