 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08719 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance. Despite Applicant’s good-faith efforts to resolve her 
delinquent debts, she failed to establish a track record of debt repayment or financial 
rehabilitation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended her case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on August 12, 2016. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She received 
the FORM on August 22, 2016, and provided a response. The documents appended to 
the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and those offered 
by Applicant are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. All documents are admitted 
without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since 2013. She previously served 
on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 2006 to January 2011. As of 
November 2014, she served in the Hawaii Air National Guard. She claims to have held 
a security clearance while on active duty. On her most recent security clearance 
application, dated November 2014, Applicant disclosed receiving a warning from her Air 
National Guard command for violating the terms of her government-issued travel credit 
card in April 2013. She also disclosed a delinquent credit card account and the balance 
due on a broken lease. The ensuing investigation revealed additional delinquent 
accounts. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $23,600 on 11 delinquent accounts and 
that she was evicted from an apartment in October 2013.  
 
 Applicant blames her financial problems on a series of events between 2013 and 
2014, including family emergencies, maternity leave, and periods of unemployment for 
herself and her husband.  According to her answer to the SOR, between September 
2015 and May 2016, Applicant contacted her creditors and arranged payment plans for 
the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. She paid off the account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k ($171). In May 2016, Applicant contacted a credit-counseling 
service, but it is unclear if Applicant completed any financial counseling with the 
organization.  
 
 In her September 2016 response to the FORM, Applicant did not provide 
evidence of the payments under the plans she negotiated months earlier. Instead, she 
provided an August 2016 enrollment agreement for a debt-relief program to resolve 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j. and 1.l. Under the terms of the agreement, 
Applicant agreed to pay $413 monthly for 40 months, beginning in in August 2016. 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence of the August or September 2016 payments. 
According to the monthly budget she prepared as part of her enrollment with the debt 
relief program, Applicant, a married mother of two, will only have $17 in disposable 
income after paying the program’s monthly payment.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An 
individual who is financially overextended is at a greater risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.3  
 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
4 
 
The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case that Applicant has 
demonstrated a history of not meeting financial obligations and inability to pay her 
creditors.4 Applicant receives partial mitigation of the security concerns as her financial 
problems were caused by events beyond her control. She also receives partial 
mitigation for her efforts to resolve her delinquent accounts and her enrollment in a 
debt-relief program. However, absent a track record of debt repayment, the record does 
not support a finding that Applicant acted responsibly in light of her circumstances, that 
she is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay her creditors, or that her financial 
problems are under control.5 
 
  After reviewing the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Although Applicant has a demonstrated a strong desire to 
repay her creditors and is taking steps to do so, she has not provided evidence to show 
that she has implemented her plans. Furthermore, the record raises concerns about her 
ability to afford the debt-relief program’s payment plan. Having failed to establish a track 
record of debt repayment and financial rehabilitation, the security concerns remain.  
 
  This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the type of financial stability necessary to justify the granting of a 
security clearance. The award of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. A clearance is not granted due to Applicant’s current 
circumstances. However, in the future, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence 
of her security worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:      Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Applicable financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶¶ 19 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and, 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
5 I considered the following financial considerations mitigating conditions: AG ¶¶ 20(b) the conditions the 
resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s control . . ., and the person acted 
responsibly under the circumstances; (c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problems from a legitimate and credible source, . . .and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolve or is under control; and (d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.   
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
