1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 15-05370 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant illegally used and purchased prescription drugs, primarily opiates, from 
January 2004 to December 2012, including after he had been granted a security clearance. 
He abused alcohol on occasion with two drunk-driving offenses in August 2007 and April 
2013. He reports no illegal use or misuse of opiates since December 15, 2012, but he 
continued to consume alcohol after being court ordered to abstain. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On September 2, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement), Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption), Guideline J (criminal conduct), and Guideline E (personal conduct). The 
SOR explained why the DOD CAF was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the 
action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
REDACTED
2 
 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 30, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations. The response in 
the file does not indicate whether or not he wanted a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On October 13, 2016, the 
Government submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), indicating that Applicant had 
requested that his case be resolved without a hearing. The FORM consisted of nine 
exhibits (Items 1-9). DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant and instructed him 
to respond within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on November 1, 2016. 
No response to the FORM was received by the December 1, 2016 deadline. On August 14, 
2017, I was assigned the case to determine whether it is clearly consistent with national 
security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Applicant did not object to 
proceeding without a hearing. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel submitted as Item 9 summaries of subject interviews of 
Applicant conducted on February 4, 2014, January 28, 2015, and February 11, 2015. The 
summaries were part of the DOD Report of Investigation (ROI) in Applicant’s case. Under ¶ 
E3.1.20 of the Directive, a DOD personnel background report of investigation may be 
received in evidence and considered with an authenticating witness, provided it is 
otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence. The interview summaries did 
not bear the authentication required for admissibility under AG ¶ E3.1.20. 
 
 In ISCR Case No. 15-01807 decided on April 19, 2017, the Appeal Board held that it 
was not error for an administrative judge to admit and consider a summary of personal 
subject interview in the absence of any objection to it or any indication that it contained 
inaccurate information. The applicant in that case had objected on appeal to the accuracy 
of some of the information in a FORM, but had not objected to the interview summary or 
indicated that it was inaccurate in any aspects when she responded to the FORM. 
 
 Unlike the applicant in ISCR Case No. 15-01807, Applicant did not submit a 
response to the FORM submitted in his case. However, as in ISCR Case No. 15-01807, 
Applicant was provided a copy of the FORM and advised of his opportunity to submit 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
objections or material that he wanted the administrative judge to consider. In a footnote, 
the FORM advised Applicant of the following: 
 
**IMPORTANT NOTICE TO APPLICANT: The attached summary of your 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) is being provided to the Administrative 
Judge for consideration as part of the record evidence in this case. In your 
response to this File of Relevant Material (FORM), you can comment on 
whether [the] PSI summary accurately reflects the information you provided 
to the authorized OPM investigator(s) and you can make any corrections, 
additions, deletions, and updates necessary to make the summary clear and 
accurate. Alternatively, you can object on the ground that the report is 
unauthenticated by a Government witness. If no objections are raised in your 
response to the FORM, or if you do not respond to the FORM, the 
Administrative Judge may determine that you have waived any objections to 
the admissibility of the summary and may consider the summary as evidence 
in your case.** 
 
 Concerning whether Applicant understood the meaning of authentication or the legal 
consequences of waiver, Applicant’s pro se status does not confer any due process rights 
or protections beyond those afforded him if he was represented by legal counsel. He was 
advised in ¶ E3.1.4 of the Directive that he may request a hearing. In ¶ E3.1.15, he was 
advised that he is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, or mitigate facts 
admitted by him or proven by Department Counsel and that he has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision. While the Directive does not 
specifically provide for a waiver of the authentication requirement, Applicant was placed on 
sufficient notice of his opportunity to object to the admissibility of the interview summaries, 
to comment on the interview summaries, and to make any corrections, deletions, or 
updates to the information in the report. He was advised that if he did not respond, the 
interview summaries may be considered as evidence in his case. Applicant chose to rely 
solely on the record presented in the FORM, which included the information reflected in the 
interview summaries, however disqualifying, mitigating, or exculpatory the information. I 
cannot presume without any evidence that Applicant failed to understand his due process 
rights or obligations under the Directive or that he did not want the summaries of his 
interviews considered in his case. Accordingly, I accepted Item 9 in the record, subject to 
issues of relevance and materiality in light of the entire record, including Applicant’s 
admissions to the allegations. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant misused prescription 
medications, including opiate narcotics, and purchased them without a prescription after he 
had been granted a Department of Defense (DOD) security clearance on November 1, 
2011 (SOR ¶ 1.a);2  that he had illegally used prescription medications from approximately 
                                                 
2 Applicant is alleged to have misused prescription medications, including “Oxycodone, OxyContin, and 
Hydrocon [sic].” OxyContin is the trade name for one of several oxycodone hydrochloride opiate analgesics, 
which include Percocet. Hydrocodone drugs include the analgesics Hycodan, Lortab, and Vicodin.  
4 
 
January 2004 to approximately December 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b); that he illegally purchased 
prescription medications from January 2004 to approximately December 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c); 
that he was involuntarily “incarcerated” in 2006 for drug counseling (SOR ¶ 1.d); and that 
he had outpatient drug and alcohol treatment from March 2014 to July 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.e). 
 
 Under Guideline G, Applicant was convicted in August 2007 of driving under the 
influence (DUI) (refusal), running a stop sign, and open container (SOR ¶ 2.a); that he 
participated in a DUI-level I class in approximately January 2008 as a result of his 2007 
DUI (SOR ¶ 2.b); that he received substance abuse treatment from February 13, 2008, to 
September 3, 2008, for diagnosed alcohol abuse (SOR ¶ 2.c); that he continued to drink 
alcohol despite a court order to abstain (SOR ¶ 2.d); that he pleaded no contest to April 29, 
2013 charges of DUI (second offense), refusal, driving on a suspended license, and 
crossing the median (SOR ¶ 2.e); that he participated in a DUI-level II class in January 
2014 (SOR ¶  2.f); that he was evaluated in February 2014 and referred for substance 
abuse counseling (SOR ¶ 2.g); that he participated in outpatient drug and alcohol treatment 
from March 2014 to July 2014 (SOR ¶ 2.h); and that he registered violations of his alcohol-
interlock device in November 2014 (SOR ¶ 2.i) and November 2015 (SOR ¶ 2.j). 
 
 His illegal use and purchase of prescription medications, his DUI offenses, his 
continued drinking against court order, and his violations of his alcohol-interlock devices 
were cross-alleged under Guideline J (SOR ¶ 3.b) and Guideline E (SOR ¶¶ 4.a, 4.b). 
Applicant was also alleged under Guideline J (SOR ¶ 3.a) and Guideline E (SOR ¶ 4.c) to 
have been arrested for trespassing resisting without violence, resisting with violence, and 
battery on a police officer, although convicted of convicted of trespassing and resisting 
without violence. No dates were alleged for his arrest or conviction. 
 
 When he responded to the SOR allegations, Applicant admitted the Guideline H, G, 
and J allegations. He did not respond to Guideline E, but Applicant admitted the underlying 
facts in response to the other guidelines. Applicant denied any use of opiate pain 
medication since December 2012, and he indicated that all programs, classes, probation, 
fines, and counseling have been successfully completed. He attributed the interlock-device 
violations to “still having a slight amount of alcohol on [his] breath from the night before 
sometimes mouthwash. Settings was [sic] 0.025.” Regarding the trespassing offense, 
Applicant asserted that he had completed his probation, farm time, fines, and anger 
management class. He explained that he was going through a divorce in 2013 and did not 
cope well with the separation. He added that he had purchased a new home in August 
2015 and had remarried in September 2016. (Answer.)    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the FORM, which includes Applicant’s Answer to the SOR as Item 
1, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee with a graduate equivalency diploma who has 
worked for his defense-contractor employer since February 2002. He is currently a senior 
packaging technician and holds a DOD secret clearance that was granted to him in early 
5 
 
November 2011.3  Applicant was married to his first wife from March 2004 to July 2013. He 
and his current spouse wed in September 2016. Applicant has no children, and he reports 
no military service. (Items 2-3, 9.) 
 
 In approximately January 2004, Applicant began using prescription analgesics 
recreationally with friends at parties. He liked how the drugs made him feel, and in 2005, 
he began using one tablet of OxyContin illegally on a daily basis. He purchased the drug 
illegally from a friend and also obtained it with a prescription from a physician who ran a 
“pill mill.” By 2006, he felt he was addicted to prescription opiates. While suffering from 
withdrawal symptoms for his drug problem, he was involuntarily committed to a treatment 
facility for three days of drug detoxification. Two months after his discharge, he resumed 
his prescription drug purchase and abuse. (Items 2, 9.) Applicant continued to abuse 
opiates after being placed on an anti-depressant in 2009. (Item 9.) 
 
 On May 17, 2010, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). He responded “Yes” to an inquiry 
into whether he had illegally used any controlled substance, including prescription 
painkillers, in the last seven years, and indicated that he illegally took pain medication from 
January 2004 to August 2009 “on and  off through the years above.” (Item 3.) 
 
 In July 2010, Applicant fractured his back in a car accident. He was prescribed 
analgesic opiates but he also illegally purchased extra OxyContin and other oxycodone 
drugs for his personal use. He misused the drugs on a daily basis to at least December 15, 
2012, after being granted a DOD secret clearance. He had additional surgeries in February 
2012 and June 2012, for which he was prescribed opiate analgesics, and he was out of 
work on short-term disability. His abuse of prescription opiates caused marital issues, and 
he and his ex-wife separated in December 2012 and divorced in May 2013. During an 
interview with an authorized investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on 
February 4, 2014, Applicant indicated that when his prescription ran out, he weaned 
himself off the opiates. (Items 2, 9.) During a more recent interview with an OPM 
investigator on February 11, 2015, Applicant denied any current association with persons 
who use drugs illegally and indicated that the police had closed down the office of the 
physician from which he obtained some of his opiates. (Item 9.)  
 
 Applicant first drank alcohol at age 15, although he had no adverse incidents until 
August 2007. After drinking four to five beers out with a friend, Applicant was stopped for 
running a stop sign. He refused to submit to field sobriety tests and was arrested for DUI, 
failure to stop, and open container of alcohol. He pleaded no contest and was found guilty 
of DUI. He was sentenced to pay an $800 fine, perform 25 hours of community service, 
and complete a DUI-level I class and one year of probation. His driving privileges were 
                                                 
3 Applicant told an OPM investigator on February 11, 2015, that he was granted a secret clearance in May 
2010. (Item 9.) On his September 2013 SF 86 (Item 2), he gave May 2010 as the date for his background 
investigation and indicated that he did not know the date his clearance was granted. He completed an SF 86 
on May 17, 2010 (Item 3), so it is likely that he was granted his security clearance after May 2010. The SOR 
alleges that he continued to misuse prescription opiates after his clearance was granted on or about 
November 1, 2011. Applicant admitted the allegation without any change to the date. 
6 
 
restricted to commuting to and from work for one year. Applicant completed the DUI class 
as required in approximately January 2008. He was assessed and referred to a substance 
abuse education and counseling program, which he attended for 36 weeks between 
February 2008 and September 2008. (Items 2-3, 9.) 
 
 After his DUI, Applicant continued to consume alcohol, about six beers a month, 
when fishing or socializing at friends’ homes. After he and his ex-spouse separated in 
December 2012, Applicant’s drinking increased. On an occasion in March 2013, he 
consumed five or six beers during the day and then six or seven beers to intoxication at a 
bar that evening while socializing with a cousin and a friend. After getting into an argument 
with his cousin, Applicant left the bar on foot. He fell asleep on the curb near an apartment 
complex, and was awakened by the police. Applicant recalls getting into a physical 
altercation with the officer. He was arrested for felony battery on a law enforcement officer, 
resisting arrest with violence, misdemeanor trespassing, and misdemeanor resisting arrest 
without violence. (Items 7, 9.) Applicant pleaded no contest in November 2013 and was 
convicted of resisting arrest without violence, obstruction of justice, and trespassing. He 
was fined $400 and ordered to attend eight hours of anger management counseling, to 
submit to a substance abuse evaluation, to serve five days on a work farm, and to 
complete 12 months of probation. (Item 9.) 
 
 In late April 2013, Applicant consumed ten beers at a nightclub. He was stopped for 
weaving and arrested for DUI–2nd offense, refusal to submit to a breath, urine, or blood DUI 
test after previous suspension, and for crossing the median. Applicant continued to drink 
alcohol, about one or two beers a month, after his arrest. At his court appearance in 
August 2013, Applicant was convicted of DUI–2nd offense and refusal to submit to a DUI 
test. He was fined $1,700 and ordered to complete 100 hours of community service, a DUI 
level II class, and a victims’ awareness class. He was placed on 12 months of probation, 
and he lost his driving privileges for one year. Applicant was court ordered to abstain from 
alcohol and illegal drug use while on probation. He continued to drink a beer approximately 
every other month, knowing that he was subject to random drug and alcohol testing. (Items 
8, 9.) 
 
 On September 16, 2013, Applicant’s employer submitted an adverse information 
report notifying the DOD abut Applicant’s arrest and conviction for the April 2013 DUI. (Item 
8.) On his September 26, 2013 SF 86, Applicant disclosed his 2007 and 2013 DUIs and 
then pending charges for felony battery and resisting arrest with violence and 
misdemeanor trespassing and resisting arrest without violence. He also reported that he 
had illegally used and purchased prescription pain medications from approximately 
January 2004 and December 2012. He responded affirmatively to an inquiry into whether 
that drug involvement occurred while he possessed a security clearance. He denied any 
intention to be involved in any illegal drug activity in the future. In response to an inquiry 
concerning the misuse of prescription drugs, Applicant indicated that he had misused 
oxycodone from January 2004 to December 2012. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant sought treatment from a psychologist in late October 2013 for his alcohol 
and drug problem. He reported that he had struggled with pain medication for years, from 
7 
 
2005 until his last use on December 15, 2012, and that he had used alcohol on and off 
since he was about 15 years old. During counseling sessions in November 2013, Applicant 
expressed resistance to involvement in support groups like Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). 
On November 18, 2013, the psychologist noted in part, “Abstinence as the main issue and 
the primary problem–Dep will not respond during substance abuse.” (Item 6.) Applicant did 
not continue in counseling with the psychologist after November 2013, electing instead to 
obtain his anti-depressant and anti-anxiety medications from his primary care doctor. (Item 
9.) 
 
 In early February 2014, Applicant was evaluated under a court order for his DUI–2nd 
offense. He was referred for substance abuse treatment. During a February 4, 2016, 
interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant acknowledged his pattern of misuse or 
prescription medication and alcohol, which he attributed to his surgeries and divorce. He 
denied ever being diagnosed with alcohol abuse. He admitted that, despite being court 
ordered in August 2013 to abstain from alcohol and illegal drug use while on probation, he 
was drinking one beer approximately every other month. On February 6, 2014, Applicant 
was re-contacted by the OPM investigator. He admitted that he was drinking one beer 
every one to two months and expressed an intention to continue to drink at that rate, which 
he described as “a rare beer’. He denied any intention to misuse any prescription 
medication in the future. (Item 9.)  
 
 On March 10, 2014, Applicant had an intake evaluation for an 18-week adult 
outpatient alcohol and drug abuse treatment program. He reported that in addition to the 
uncontrolled use of opioids from 2004 to December 15, 2012, he had abused 
benzodiazepines from 2011 to December 15, 2012. He denied any use of prescription 
opioids or benzodiazepines since December 2012, and claimed abstinence from alcohol 
since August 2013, which was contrary to his admission to the OPM investigator. (Item 5.) 
Applicant successfully completed an 18-week alcohol outpatient alcohol and drug abuse 
treatment program on July 17, 2014. (Item 4.) Available medical records do not reflect a 
clinical diagnosis. 
 
  On January 28, 2015, Applicant was again interviewed by an OPM investigator. He 
indicated that he had successfully completed the sentencing terms for his 2013 offenses, 
including an eight-hour anger management class. Applicant denied any illegal drug use 
since December 2012, and he indicated that he passed drug screens while he was on 
probation for his 2013 DUI and trespassing offenses. He claimed he did not drink any 
alcohol while on his year-long probation that ended in October or November 2014. He 
reported drinking one to four beers a week since then, even though he has a “breathalyzer 
machine” (interlock device) on his car for one year from November 2014. He explained that 
he drinks alone in his home. He denied any consumption to intoxication since he finished 
his probation and indicated that he feels in control of his drinking. When re-contacted by 
the investigator on February 11, 2015, Applicant primarily addressed his past abuse of 
prescription opiates, including OxyContin, and his March 2013 arrest. He volunteered that 
he had received two letters from his state safety council about failing his interlock 
breathalyzer on his vehicle in October 2014 and December 2014 [sic].4 He expressed his 
                                                 
4 The dates for the Interlock device violations are likely incorrect. Applicant indicated during his previous 
8 
 
belief that he failed the breathalyzers because he had consumed alcohol the night before 
and his car would not start the next morning. Consequently, he was required to report in 
person to the safety council on a monthly basis and faced treatment should he commit a 
third violation. (Item 9.)  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
                                                                                                                                                             
interview that the device was installed in November 2014. The SOR alleges that he registered violations in 
November 2014 and January 2015, and he admitted the allegations when he answered the SOR. 
9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concerns about drug involvement and substance misuse are articulated 
in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
  
Applicant began using prescription analgesics recreationally with friends at parties. 
He liked how the drugs made him feel, and in 2005 he began using one tablet of 
OxyContin illegally on a daily basis. He purchased the drug illegally from a friend and also 
obtained it with a prescription from a physician who ran a “pill mill.” By 2006, he felt he was 
addicted to prescription opiates. Suffering from withdrawal symptoms, he was involuntarily 
committed as an inpatient for three days of detoxification in 2006. He continued to illegally 
use and purchase prescription opiates, and misused opiate analgesics that were 
prescribed for him following surgeries in February 2012 and June 2012. He abused opiates 
on a daily basis through December 15, 2012, when his prescription for opiate analgesics 
ran out. He held a DOD secret clearance during the last year of his illegal drug activity. 
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 25(a), “any substance misuse (see above definition),” AG ¶ 
25(c), “illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” and AG 
¶ 25(f), “any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a 
sensitive position,” apply. 
 
Several factors suggest that he was likely addicted to opiates, such as his daily 
abuse of OxyContin at times and his withdrawal symptoms with involuntary detoxification. 
He bought the drug illegally from a friend and an unethical physician known to run a “pill 
mill.” He was unable to cease his illegal involvement with prescription opiates before mid-
December 2012. Yet he denies ever being diagnosed with drug dependence, and the 
treatment records in the file do not reflect a formal diagnosis. Anecdotal references to 
being addicted fall short of establishing AG ¶ 25(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical 
or mental health professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed 
clinical social worker) of substance use disorder.” 
 
10 
 
 With no clear evidence implicating Applicant in the illegal use of opiates or other 
prescription drugs after December 15, 2012, AG ¶ 26(a) has some applicability in that it 
happened “so long ago.” AG ¶ 26(a) provides: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Even so, his abuse of prescription opiates, which was daily at times and continued after he 
was granted a DOD secret clearance, raises considerable doubts about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) provides for mitigation when an individual acknowledges his drug 
involvement and has taken steps to address it: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant told an OPM investigator in February 2014 that after his prescription ran 
out and he and his ex-wife separated in December 2012, he weaned himself off the opiate 
drugs. He has consistently asserted that his last use was on December 15, 2012. Although 
I have some concerns about Applicant’s judgment because of his illegal opiate use and 
purchase, as outlined in Guideline E, infra, I cannot presume that he has abused opiates 
after December 15, 2012, without evidence of drug involvement or substance misuse. The 
evidence shows that alcohol became his drug of choice after he and his spouse separated. 
His four plus years of no prescribed opiate misuse or illegal use are sufficient to establish a 
pattern of abstinence. 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is articulated in AG ¶ 21, which states: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
11 
 
 Applicant’s drinking caused him no problems until August 2007, when he was 
arrested for his first DUI. After completing a DUI–level I class in 2008 and alcohol 
counseling from February 2008 to September 2008, he continued to drink alcohol. His 
alcohol consumption increased significantly after his marital separation in December 2012. 
He drank ten beers at a nightclub before being arrested for DUI–2nd offense in late April 
2013.  His DUI offenses establish disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 22(a) and AG ¶ 22(c),5 
which provide: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouses abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder. 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted without explanation, that during substance 
abuse treatment from February 2008 to September 2008, he was diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser (SOR ¶ 2.c). His intake evaluation for his 2014 treatment indicates that Applicant 
attended a DUI program in 2008. There is no evidence confirming a diagnosis that would 
trigger AG ¶ 22(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social worker) of 
alcohol use disorder.” However, AG ¶ 22(g), “failure to follow any court order regarding 
alcohol education, evaluation, treatment, or abstinence,” is established. Applicant 
continued to consume alcohol while on probation from August 2013 to November 2014 for 
his April 2013 DUI–2nd and his March 2013 trespassing and resisting arrest offenses, 
knowing that he had been ordered by the court to abstain from alcohol. Moreover, he 
violated the conditions of his alcohol-interlock device in approximately November 2014 and 
again in January 2015. 
 
 None of the pertinent mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 fully applies. His April 
2013 DUI did not happen so long ago to conclude that it is unlikely to recur under AG ¶ 
23(a), which states: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment. 
                                                 
5 Applicant’s criminal conduct (trespassing and residing arrest) would also qualify as an alcohol-related 
incident away from work. He consumed five or six beers during the day and then six or seven beers to 
intoxication at a bar the evening of his arrest in March 2013.  However, the incident was not alleged under 
Guideline G, despite evidence showing that he was intoxicated on that occasion. His consumption of 11-13 
beers that day was excessive and could also have triggered AG ¶ 22(c). 
 
12 
 
 
 AG ¶ 23(b) and AG ¶ 23(d) are partially established in that Applicant has had 
treatment for his abusive use of alcohol. They provide: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along with 
any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant attributes his 2007 DUI to an isolated incident and his 2013 DUI to his 
failure to cope well with the dissolution of his marriage. He is credited with completing an 
18-week adult outpatient alcohol and drug abuse treatment program in July 2014, although 
that program cannot be considered completely voluntarily, given he was under court order 
to comply with the substance abuse evaluation and referral for treatment. It is unlikely that 
his ongoing drinking would be considered compliance with treatment recommendations. He 
admitted to an OPM investigator on February 4, 2014, that despite being court ordered to 
abstain from alcohol, he was drinking one beer every other month. In January 2015, he 
discrepantly claimed he had not consumed alcohol during his probation. However, he 
admitted that after he was discharged from probation in October or November 2014, he 
resumed drinking one to four beers a week and that he had recently registered violations of 
his interlock device on two separate occasions from consuming alcohol the previous 
evening. Yet he now claims that mouthwash may have caused the violations, which casts 
doubt upon whether he fully acknowledges his pattern of maladaptive alcohol use and is 
willing to make the changes necessary to preclude a recurrence of excessive drinking. 
Neither AG ¶ 23(b) nor AG ¶ 23(d) fully applies. The alcohol consumption security 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern about criminal conduct is articulated in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.” 
 
 Applicant has a pattern of failure to conform his behavior to the law, as evidenced by 
his several years of illegal use and purchase of prescription drugs (primarily the opiate 
OxyContin), his conviction for trespassing and resisting arrest in March 2013, his 2007 and 
2013 DUI offenses, his disregard of a court order to abstain from alcohol while on 
probation from August 2013 to October or November 2014, and his violations of his 
interlock device in approximately November 2014 and January 2015. Three disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 31 are implicated: 
13 
 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely 
to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast 
doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, 
and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, persecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(d) violation or revocation or parole or probation, or failure to complete a 
court-mandated rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant’s 2007 DUI occurred some time ago. His opiate abuse stopped in 
December 2012. However, his recidivist drunk-driving offense of April 2013, his trespassing 
and resisting arrest in March 2013, and his failure to fully comply with the terms required by 
the court to establish rehabilitation of his DUI–2nd offense, preclude mitigation under AG ¶ 
32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant shows some 
rehabilitation by successfully completing the alcohol and drug treatment program in July 
2014, but given his subsequent drinking, which led him to register violations of his Interlock 
device, I am unable to fully apply AG ¶ 32(d), which provides: 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant has not provided convincing evidence that he can be counted on to fully comply 
with his legal obligations. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct  
  
The concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
 The SOR cites personal conduct security concerns in these aspects:  Applicant’s 
illegal use or misuse and purchase of prescription drugs from January 2004 to December 
2012, including after he had been granted a DOD secret clearance; his DUI convictions, 
continued drinking after being ordered by a court not to consume alcohol with violations of 
14 
 
his interlock device; and his trespassing and resisting arrest offense. In all these instances, 
Applicant exhibited extremely poor judgment as articulated in AG ¶ 15. Information can 
have security relevance under more than one guideline. His illegal involvement with opiate 
medications while holding a security clearance is an aggravating factor that has 
independent security significance apart from whether he is reformed of his drug 
involvement because it shows an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. When 
considered as a whole, Applicant’s exercise of questionable judgment in several 
adjudicative issue areas indicates that he may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information, even though AG ¶ 16(c) does not strictly apply because some of the 
adverse information is sufficient for an adverse determination under another guideline. AG 
¶ 16(c) provides: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
However, AG ¶ 17(g) applies because of Applicant’s association from 2004 to 2012 with 
friends from whom he illegally purchased prescription drugs. 
 
 Concerning the potentially mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, his exercise of poor 
judgment for more than a decade was neither so infrequent or so far in the past to satisfy 
AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 
17(g), “association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, has ceased, or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations,” has some 
applicability in that there is no evidence that Applicant has been associated with any illegal 
drug users or sellers since 2012. However, AG ¶ 17(g) is irrelevant to Applicant’s 
maladaptive use of alcohol and his failure to comply with court orders. AG ¶ 17(d) is 
partially established in that Applicant is not likely to engage in illegal drug use or substance 
misuse in the future. AG ¶ 17(d) states: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
The personal conduct security concerns are not fully mitigated. 
15 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).6 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(a), I 
recognize there is no evidence of any adverse impact on Applicant’s work because of his 
substance abuse. Even so, Applicant has raised considerable doubts about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness by taking prescription drugs without a prescription for several 
years, including at times daily. He admitted that he felt dependent on opiates. His 
purchases from a physician that operated what he described as a “pill mill” suggests a drug 
problem that was out of control. After his marital separation, he turned to alcohol with 
adverse legal consequences. There is no evidence of any alcohol-related incident since 
April 2013, and he apparently successfully completed an outpatient alcohol and drug 
program in July 2014. Yet he also continued to consume alcohol while on probation and his 
more recent violations of his interlock device indicate an inability or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
The Appeal Board has repeatedly held that the government need not wait until an 
applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before denying or revoking 
security clearance eligibility. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009, 
citing Adams v. Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969)). It is well settled that once a 
concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). For the reasons discussed, Applicant has raised 
enough doubt in that regard to where I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to continue his security clearance eligibility.  
   
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
                                                 
6 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
16 
 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 4.a-4.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
