1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06571 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate drug 
involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 5, 2015, to obtain a security clearance required for a position with a 
defense contractor. (Item 3) This is Applicant’s first request for a security clearance. 
Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on June 17, 2015 (Item 4, Interview (PSI)). After reviewing the 
results of the background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On June 14, 2016, 
DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
drug involvement (Guideline H). (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006.  
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2016, admitting the allegation of 
marijuana use from April 2014 until at least April 2015 (SOR 1.a). He also admitted the 
allegation that he intended to use marijuana in the future (SOR 1.b). Applicant elected 
to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on October 19, 2016. Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on November 2, 2016, and he was provided 
the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the disqualifying conditions.(Item 5) Applicant did not provided additional information in 
response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on October 1, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs, and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 4) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised 
that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the administrative judge could determine that he waived 
any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM (Item 5), so he did not object to consideration of the PSI. Since Applicant did not 
object to consideration of the PSI, I will consider the information in the PSI in my 
decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 35-years-old. He graduated from high school in May 2001, and received a 
bachelor’s degree in May 2005. He completed the academic requirements for his 
master’s degree in December 2008, and started working for his defense contractor 
employer as a structural analysis engineer in January 2009. He received his master’s 
degree in May 2009. He married in June 2006, and divorced in May 2010. He has no 
children. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated May 5, 2015) 
   
Applicant admits, in response to question 23 of the e-QIP, that he used 
marijuana three times from April 2014 until April 2015. (SOR 1.a) He admits to once 
eating a brownie made with marijuana, once smoking a marijuana cigarette, and once 
being in a closed room inhaling while others smoked marijuana. He wrote that he never 
3 
 
used marijuana in such a way as to impede his responsibilities. He only used marijuana 
recreationally. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant told the security investigator in the PSI that he used marijuana three 
times from April 2014 until April 2015 with two friends. His use was social and 
experimental, and he is not dependent on marijuana. He intends to recreationally use 
marijuana in the future if marijuana is legalized, or when he retires and he no longer 
requires a security clearance. He does not intend to use marijuana at any time so as to 
impede his job performance or responsibilities. He would not use marijuana if it impedes 
his eligibility for access to classified information. He needs a security clearance to reach 
his career objectives. (Item 4 at 4) 
 
Applicant wrote in his response to the SOR that he used marijuana with varying 
frequency from April 2014 to April 2015. He noted that the drug was purchased where it 
could be purchased legally. He intends to use marijuana in the future. He used 
marijuana to better inform himself about marijuana because of the pending legislation to 
legalize marijuana. He believes the legal purchase of marijuana, and the responsible 
and moderate use marijuana is no different than the legal purchase and responsible and 
moderate use of alcohol. He stated that when the acquisition and use of marijuana is 
legalized, he would use marijuana responsibly and moderately. (Item 2) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decision shall be “in terms of eh national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1 (b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified and sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The illegal use of a controlled substance to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or 
mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 
U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. (AG ¶ 24) 
 
Applicant admits that he used marijuana three times from April 2014 until April 
2015. He also stated his intent to use marijuana in the future if it is declared a legal 
drug. Marijuana is a controlled substance. To use marijuana it had to be possessed. 
These facts raise the following Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 
25: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; and  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.  
5 
 
 I considered the following Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome his 
problems, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any further involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant admits to using marijuana three 
times from April 2014 until April 2015. It should be noted that Applicant completed his e-
QIP in May 2015 and was interviewed in June 2015. The last information in the case file 
is as of June 2015. Applicant had an opportunity to update and amend the information 
in the file when he responded to the FORM in November 2016. Other than his 
statement that he only used marijuana three times, there are no other indications that 
this was his only use and that he stopped using illegal drugs. The timing of his self-
reported use of marijuana shows his misuse to be frequent, recent, and deliberate.  
 
 Applicant stated an intent not to misuse controlled substances in the future, but 
he did not execute an agreement to that effect. The only evidence of his intent is his 
statement. His intent to not use marijuana in the future was conditioned on marijuana 
use being legal. His misuse could start at any time that he determines that the use is 
legal. Applicant has not provided sufficient information for me to be convinced that he 
has stopped misusing marijuana and will not use the illegal drug in the future. There is 
no evidence of the extent of his participating in and the results of drug treatment and 
6 
 
counseling programs. There are no evaluations from counselors as to his prognosis for 
not using illegal drugs in the future. He did not present any evidence that would bolster 
or corroborate his non-use of marijuana. Since Applicant provided no documentation to 
verify that he no longer uses illegal drugs; that he successfully completed a drug abuse 
treatment program; and that his statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future 
is unreliable, Applicant has failed to mitigate drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant admitted substance 
misuse from April 2014 until April 2015. He presented no evidence of counseling and 
rehabilitation. He stated an intent to use marijuana in the future if marijuana use is 
declared legal. There is no indication that he would not use until then. Overall, these 
facts leave me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for access to classified information. For all 
these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
TH0MAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
