 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07273 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. He did mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant timely answered the SOR 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM), Government’s evidence in support of the allegations in the SOR, on January 
26, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on February 3, 2017, and had 30 days to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a ten page response to the 
FORM (Response). The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 4, is 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 
2017.  
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He graduated high school in 2002 and obtained his 
Associate’s degree in 2003. Applicant has been employed as a fitness attendant by a 
federal contractor since March 2015, and he is supposed to deploy overseas contingent 
on obtaining a security clearance. Applicant reports no military service and he has never 
married. Applicant reports periods of unemployment from December 2006 to August 
2009, and December 2010 to April 2012. Applicant reported being delinquent on paying 
his student loans since December 2010, (in section 26 of his 2015 Security Clearance 
Application SCA).2 Also, he had his income-tax refund garnished one year to apply 
toward his student loan debt. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the seven delinquent debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h. He also denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a stating “I did not 
intend to falsify material facts on a Questionnaire for National Security Positions.”3 
Applicant did disclose the delinquencies on his student loans in his SCA, attributing this 
to “insufficient employment”.4 Since all of the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.h, 
pertain to his delinquent student loans, it is difficult to discern how he could have 
falsified his SCA at section 26 – financial record – delinquency involving routine 
accounts – as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. I find that he did not intend to falsify material facts 
on his SCA.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c all concern charged-off debts totaling over $99,000 
owed to a debt collection agency for student loans. SOR ¶ 1.d and ¶ 1.e both relate to 
student loan debts placed for collection by the Department of Education totaling over 
$22,000. SOR ¶¶ 1.f to 1.h are for past-due student loan debts totaling more than 
$3,000. In his response to the FORM, Applicant takes full responsibility for all of his 
delinquent and defaulted student loans. He claims that he has been struggling with 
these debts since July 2008, but “no arrangements have been made at this time.”  While 
he was deployed overseas with his federal contractor employer, Applicant was informed 
that he lost his security clearance in 2015. He was told to resolve his student loan debts 
and his employment would continue. In early 2016, he was terminated and remains 
unemployed, and living with his mother since April 2016. Applicant provided no 
documents or evidence to show that he has reached out to his creditors, made payment 
arrangements, or actual payments on his student loans. SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.h are not 
resolved.  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 1, 2015 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 2) 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
5 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and response to the FORM. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.6 Applicant has not met that burden. None of the 
delinquent debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control …, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant endured periods of unemployment. Arguably, these conditions were 
beyond his control. His delinquent student loan debts totaling approximately $125,000, 
are long-standing and continuing. Applicant has ignored them. He has produced no 
documentation showing efforts to address his delinquencies, either with his Answer to 
the SOR or in response to the FORM. He has not demonstrated that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The mitigating conditions 
enumerated above do not apply.  
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes….  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information as alleged at SOR 
¶ 2.a, his intent is an issue. Under ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence on facts alleged in the SOR that 
have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or determined from the circumstances. 
Applicant specifically referred to his student loan delinquencies in section 26 of his SCA. 
I conclude that he did not have the specific intent to deceive when he provided a 
negative response to the other financial questions about delinquency involving routine 
accounts in section 26, and he did not deliberately falsify the SCA. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) 
do not apply. SOR ¶ 2.a has been mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E and Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines.   
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, but he has mitigated the concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:             Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:                                   For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
