 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04389 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William Peterson, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s parents, siblings, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of the 
People’s Republic of China (China). Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2016. He admitted all of the SOR 
allegations concerning family members who are citizens and residents of China, with 
explanations, and requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the 
written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On June 23, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant and received by him on 
July 11, 2016.2 The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt 
of the FORM. Applicant subsequently received an extension to September 9, 2016, to file 
his response to the FORM. 
 
 On September 8, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
received Applicant’s response to the FORM. Applicant’s personal representative provided 
a cover letter and three enclosures containing numerous exhibits. He did not object to 
Items 1 through 4, which are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s FORM response, to 
which Department Counsel had no objection, is marked Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into 
evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 22, 2017.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Item 5, a written request that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about China, along with attachments. Applicant objected to the 
admissibility of Item 5. He argued that the Government’s supporting documents are not 
relevant to the specific facts in this case because none of the examples in the documents 
cite instances in which the Chinese government targeted U.S. citizens with relatives in 
China. Applicant submitted documents in support of his refutation of the U.S. 
Government’s case. Applicant’s objections go to the weight of the Government’s evidence 
and not its admissibility; hence his objections are overruled. I take administrative notice 
of the facts contained in the Government’s request that are supported by source 
documents from official U.S. Government publications, and the facts contained in the 
documents submitted from Applicant. (AE A.) The facts are summarized in the Findings 
of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He was born in China. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
1985 and a master’s degree in 1993 from Chinese universities. In 1996, at the age of 31, 
he arrived in the United States on a student visa. He obtained a doctoral degree in 2003 
from a U.S. university. He was a self-employed consultant between 2004 and 2007. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. (Item 3, Item 4.) 
 
                                                          
 
2Item 5 is Department Counsel’s request for Administrative Notice pertinent to China, with attachments.  
 
 
3 
 
 
In 2009, Applicant was granted a Secret security clearance through another U.S. 
agency. From 2009 to 2014, Applicant worked for a contractor for that agency. When he 
began working for his present employer, a defense contractor, in 2014, his security 
clearance transferred to his current employer. In August 2014, he submitted a security 
clearance application to upgrade his Secret security clearance to a Top Secret clearance. 
(Item 3; AE A: Enc. 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in China. They married in China in 1996 and she 
accompanied him to the United States. She became a naturalized citizen of the United 
States in 2008. They have two children who were born in the United States. (Item 3.) His 
wife and daughter traveled to China in 2012 to visit their relatives. (AE 2: Enc. 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of China. They are retired farmers. 
Applicant saw them in 2005 when they visited him in the United States. He speaks to 
them quarterly or annually. Applicant has two brothers. They are citizens and residents 
of China. He has not seen his brothers since leaving China in 1996. He contacts them 
quarterly or annually by email or telephone. One brother works as a secretary. Applicant 
does not know his current employer. That brother previously worked for the Chinese 
military in some capacity. Applicant’s other brother is a teacher at a high school. (Item 2, 
Item 3, Item 4; AE A: Enc. 3.)    
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of China. Both of them are 
retired. Applicant does not have information about their prior employment. The last time 
he saw them was at his wedding in 1996 in China. He has contact with them once a year.  
(Item 2, Item 3, Item 4; AE A: Enc. 3.) The extent of Applicant’s wife’s contact with her 
family in China is not established by the record evidence, beyond the trip she and their 
daughter took in 2005.  
 
 Applicant sends his parents and parents-in-law a few hundred U.S. dollars every 
year to help pay for living expenses. He would like to have his family members move to 
the United States, but does not think they will because of their elderly age. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant has not returned to China since entering the United States in 1996. He 
said his loyalty is to the United States. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous awards and certificates he has received from his 
former employer at another U.S. agency, from his work with military personnel, and from 
his current employer. Former and current managers and colleagues submitted letters 
attesting to Applicant’s loyalty to the United States and work ethic. Applicant’s 2015 
performance evaluation documented that he received a 3.0 on a 5.0 rating scale; his 2016 
evaluation documented that he received a 4.0 on a 5.0 rating scale. (AE A.)  
 
 Applicant owns a home in the United States with an estimated value of $418,000. 
He has about $65,000 in investment accounts in the United States. (AE A.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant and his wife are active and supportive of their children’s involvement in 
non-school activities. (AE A.) A friend of Applicant stated that Applicant never intends to 
return to China because of its “intolerable human rights situation and the terrible 
unfairness.” (AE A.) Applicant said his family is not aware of with his work for the U.S. 
Government or the fact that he holds a security clearance. (Item 4; AE A.) 
 
China3 
 
I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in Department Counsel’s request 
concerning China, and those set forth in AE A, which are incorporated herein by reference 
as noted above. Of particular significance are the poor human rights situation; China’s 
authoritative government; China’s position as the most active, aggressive, and persistent 
country conducting economic and military espionage against the United States; its 
hostility to U.S. interests; and its surveillance of visitors to China. There are several recent 
cases involving actual or attempted espionage and the illegal export of information to 
China. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
3 Item 5; AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three of them are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;4  
                                                          
4The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
 
6 
 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government; its relationship with the United States; and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant is vulnerable 
to foreign government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or has 
political/military interests in direct opposition to U.S. interests. These facts, which are 
pertinent to China, place a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate 
that his contacts, connections, and relationships with his parents, siblings, and parents-
in-law, who are resident citizens of China, do not create a heightened risk of foreign 
influence and do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and to his family 
in China. Applicant’s immediate-family relationships are presumed to be close and loving, 
and Applicant offered no evidence to the contrary about his family. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e).  
 
The Government met its burden of production by raising the above disqualifying 
conditions and shifted the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. AG ¶ 8 lists six 
conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Those with potential 
application in mitigating the security concerns in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
                                                          
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant did not sufficiently demonstrate that it is unlikely that he could be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual or 
government and those of the United States as a consequence of his ongoing family ties 
in China. Applicant has maintained relationships with family members in China since 
leaving there in 1996. He sends money to them to help with their expenses. They visited 
him in 2005. Applicant shares living quarters with his wife who has ties with her Chinese 
parents. She visited them in 2012. Applicant did not establish what other contact or 
connections she has with her family. Applicant sends money to these in-laws for living 
expenses. Although Applicant stated his family does not know what he does for a living, 
those reassurances do not negate the risk for foreign influence and exploitation since the 
Chinese government’s ability to learn that information is more relevant. Accordingly, he 
failed to establish the mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). 
 
Applicant provided some evidence establishing longstanding relationships to the 
United States, which established partial mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b). He has lived in the 
United States since 1996; he has two children who were born here; he obtained an 
advanced degree from a U.S. university; and he has been successfully employed by 
government contractors since 2009. He and his wife became U.S. citizens in 2008. He 
has U.S. investment accounts and owns a home here.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence tending to mitigate the established foreign influence 
security concerns under the whole-person concept. Applicant is a mature person, who 
has lived in the United States since 1996 and been a U.S. citizen since 2008. His wife is 
also a naturalized citizen, and his children are U.S. citizens by birth.  There is no evidence 
that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. 
He has worked for government contractors since 2008. He asserted his loyalty to the 
United States. 
  
Other circumstances outweigh those favorable factors for Applicant in the whole-
person analysis. China’s government does not conform to widely accepted norms of 
human rights. More importantly for security concerns, China is actively involved in 
espionage against the United States, and may attempt to use naturalized U.S. citizens 
for this purpose.  Applicant was raised and educated in China and resided there until he 
was 31 years old. His parents, two siblings, and parents-in-law are resident citizens of 
China. He maintains regular contact with his family through phone calls, and by sending 
money. His parents visited him in 2005, further demonstrating their commendable familial 
affections for one another. His wife also maintains contact with her family members in 
China, and last visited them with their daughter in 2012, evidencing a strong familial bond. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the context of the 
whole-person, and considering the facts and circumstances established by the evidence 
in this record, I conclude Applicant did not sufficiently mitigate the security concerns 
pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
