 
1 
 
                                                                  
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  15-04158 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 22, 2013. On 
January 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006 (2006 AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2016 and June 27, 2016, and 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. On July 25, 2017, the 
Government submitted its written case and, on July 28, 2017, sent a complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) to Applicant, including documents identified as 
Items 1 through 6. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on 
August 9, 2016, and did not respond. Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 
 
2 
 
3 through 6 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 2, 
2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the FORM was completed. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 87, was widowed from his wife of 51 years in 2011. He has three 
adult children. Applicant received his high school diploma in 1951. He was a civilian-
federal-government employee from 1954 through 1984. He has been employed full time 
by a defense contractor since 2003. He was granted a DOD secret clearance in 1992. 
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling $28,223 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.n) 
and that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose any of them on his SCA (SOR ¶ 2.a). 
Applicant’s admitted debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j) total $17,072. 
Claiming that they did not belong to him, he denied the following debts: SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
through 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, and 1.l through 1.n.4 The credit reports establish each of the 
denied debts.5  
 
Applicant believes that the denied debts may belong to his son who shares his 
first and last name.6 During a period not specified in the record, Applicant incurred 
delinquent medical debt on behalf of his grandson to address an injury.7 However, there 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 1), his SCA (Item 3), and the summary of his May 2013 subject interview 
(Item 4). Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection to Item 4, 
I will consider only those facts in Item 4 that are not adverse to Applicant, unless they are contained in 
other evidence or based upon his admissions in the SOR answer. 
 
4 I considered that Applicant wrote “admit” in response to SOR ¶1.k. However, because he included that 
debt among the handwritten debts that he listed as not belonging to him, I have construed his answer to 
SOR ¶ 1.k as a denial. 
 
5 Items 5 and 6. 
 
6 Item 4 at 2. 
 
7 Item 4 at 2-3. 
 
 
3 
 
are no apparent medical debts alleged in the SOR.8 Among the debts alleged in the 
SOR are a $9,830 federal tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a $1,830 court judgment (SOR ¶ 
1.b). On a date not specified in the record, Applicant negotiated an installment 
agreement with the IRS, and paid $232 pursuant to that agreement. He made three 
payments, in January 2014, May 2014, and January 2015, totaling $360 to the creditor 
that obtained the court judgment. Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence 
that he paid or otherwise resolved any other debts alleged in the SOR. 
  
When confronted with his failure to disclose any delinquent debts on his SCA 
during his 2013 security clearance interview, Applicant denied any knowledge of them. 
He acknowledged that they could either be his son’s debts or the medical debts he 
incurred on behalf of his grandson. He promised to research them and pay those that 
are deemed he owes.9 During that interview, he did not address why he did not disclose 
his grandson’s medical debts on his SCA or whether he had any specific intent to falsify 
his SCA.  
 
In his SOR Answer, Applicant wrote “I admit,” without further explanation, next to 
the SCA falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, which included the fact that Applicant 
“deliberately” failed to disclose any of his delinquent debts. The Government did not 
provide any other evidence that Applicant intended to falsify his SCA. The record is 
silent as to whether Applicant has had any financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”10 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”11 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”12 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
                                                          
8 See also Items 5 and 6. 
   
9 Item 4 at 2-3. 
 
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
11 Egan at 527. 
 
12 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.14 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”15 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.16 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.17 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.18 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”19 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”20 
 
                                                          
13 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
14 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
17 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
20 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.21  
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), AG 
¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file or 
fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts remain 
unresolved. I cannot conclude that Applicant’s financial indebtedness is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While his grandson’s injury was a circumstance 
beyond his control, there are no medical debts alleged in the SOR. The record is 
insufficient to establish that the alleged debts were largely attributable to either his 
grandson’s injury or any other circumstance beyond his control. However, even if it was 
sufficient, Applicant did not meet his burden to establish that he has acted responsibly 
to address them. 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. There is no evidence that Applicant has received 
any financial counseling. 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. I credit Applicant with initiating action to resolve his 
IRS debt and with making payments towards the satisfaction of the court judgment. 
However, the record does not establish any efforts to resolve his other debt, especially 
those to which he admitted he owed. Because he did not respond to the FORM, the 
record is silent as to what, if any, progress he made in resolving his delinquent debts 
since his SOR answer, his plans for resolving those on which he has not made 
progress, and his current ability to repay his delinquent debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (e) is not established. Applicant articulated a reasonable basis to dispute 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, and 1.l through 1.n. However, he 
did not provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate any actions taken to resolve the 
issue.  
 AG ¶ 20(g) is not established. While Applicant negotiated an installment 
agreement with the IRS, one payment is insufficient to establish that he is in compliance 
with that agreement. 
 
7 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his SCA, the following 
disqualifying condition under this guideline could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
While Applicant did write “I admit” next to SOR ¶ 2.a in the SOR Answer, I do not 
find that it was a knowing and willful admission that he “deliberately” falsified his SCA in 
light of the record as a whole. He was not aware of the SOR debts until the investigator 
brought them to his attention during his 2013 interview, which took place after he 
certified his SCA. Thus, I find that the falsification allegation is controverted.  
 
When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative 
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time of the omission.22 An applicant’s level of education and business 
                                                          
22 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate.23  
 
I do not find substantial evidence of an intent on the part of Applicant to omit, 
conceal, or falsify facts from and on his SCA. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is not established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his 
SCA, but he has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his failure to pay 
delinquent tax and other debts. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
                                                          
23 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
