 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04162 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 19, 2012. 
On December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes 
resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 9, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 24, 
2016, and the case was assigned to me on July 19, 2017. On August 10, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 8, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 and 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Government Exhibit 
2, an unauthenticated summary of a personal subject interview conducted on December 
2012, was not admitted. (Tr. 8-9.) Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) A through Q, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open to 
enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX R 
through V, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 18, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent debts: a judgment for $26,596 entered against 
Applicant in 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a); and a judgment for $8,923 entered against him in 2007 
(SOR ¶ 1.b). In his answer to the SOR, he denied both allegations. Applicant disputes 
the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He satisfied the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b in April 
2014. 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor who conducts 
background investigations for the U.S. Government. He received a bachelor of science 
degree in August 1995 and a master of business administration degree in August 1999. 
(AX N.) He received a security clearance in December 1976 and has maintained it until 
the present. (GX 1 at 32; Tr. 19.)  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps from May 1975 to February 1982. In 
October 1977, he was awarded a medal for heroism after coming to the aid of an 
American civilian in a foreign country who was being attacked by several assailants 
armed with knives. Applicant was seriously injured, left for dead in the street, and 
rescued by local civilians. (AX H.)  
 
Applicant served in the Army National Guard from September 1982 to January 
1983, and on active duty in the Marine Corps from February 1983 to December 1984. 
He received the Navy Achievement Medal in June 1983. He served as a civilian police 
officer and retired from the police force in June 1995. (AX M.) He received a direct 
commission and served in in the Army National Guard from April to August 1998 and in 
the U.S. Army Reserve from August 1998 to February 2002. He received the Army 
Commendation Medal in October 2001, and received an Honorable Discharge from the 
Army Reserve in February 2002. He has a 70% service-connected disability as a result 
of his military service. (AX S.). He suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder and a 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
traumatic brain injury that causes him to have problems with walking and balance. (Tr. 
44-45.)  
 
Applicant worked for a federal contractor as an investigator from October 1998 to 
October 2007. He was a full-time federal employee until February 2008. He left federal 
employment to care for his mother, a Holocaust survivor, who had been assaulted while 
living in a home. His mother passed away in August 2008. (AX R.) He was a full-time 
federal investigator until April 2009. He has been self-employed since April 2009 and 
working as a part-time investigator for a federal contractor since July 2009. Because of 
his part-time status, he has been unemployed for a total of three to six months each 
year since 2009. (Tr. 42.)  
  
 Applicant married in March 1978, divorced in June 1981, married in June 1984, 
and divorced in September 2006. He has three children, ages 21, 27, and 25. The 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was obtained by the attorney who represented him in 
the September 2006 divorce proceedings. He paid the attorney about $23,267 for 
services rendered from March 2004 through September 2006. (AX B.) When the 
attorney informed him that he had an outstanding balance of $26,713 for legal fees, 
Applicant disputed it. The record contains no documentary evidence of Applicant’s fee 
agreement with the attorney, either in terms of a flat rate or hourly rate. 
 
In December 2006, Applicant signed an “Irrevocable Assignment and Transfer,” 
in which he agreed that the attorney would receive the lesser of the first $20,000 of the 
proceeds from the sale of the marital home or the balance due for attorney’s fees at the 
time of the sale. (AX C.) In April 2008, Applicant signed a confession of judgment for 
$26,713, listing the attorney as the creditor. (GX 3; AX D.) Applicant testified that he did 
not understand the confession of judgment and was pressured to sign it on the steps of 
the courthouse as they were about to attend a hearing related to the divorce. He 
testified that the attorney told him he would not represent him at the hearing if he did not 
sign the document immediately. Applicant testified that there was no notary present 
when he signed it, but that his signature was later notarized by a member of the 
attorney’s office. (Tr. 25, 49.) 
 
When the marital home was sold in June 2009, the attorney agreed to release 
the lien on the property. (AX E.) According to Applicant, the attorney received $15,033, 
which was the total profit on the sale. (Answer to SOR at 2.) The HUD-1 Settlement 
Statement reflects that the attorney was paid $7,949.83 at settlement and $7,102.87 
was paid to Applicant. (AX T.) However, there is no documentation showing whether the 
$7,102.87 paid to Applicant was conveyed to the attorney. Applicant testified that he 
believed the debt was settled by the sale of the property and release of the lien. (Tr. 24-
25; Answer to SOR at 2.)  
 
It is not clear whether the lien was actually released. In December 2009, 
Applicant filed a motion to release the lien, which was denied. In January 2010, the 
attorney filed a notice of lien to enforce the April 2008 judgment. (AX F.) Applicant filed 
motions for reconsideration in March 2010 and July 2010, which were denied. (GX 3 at 
 
4 
 
2; Tr. 33-34.) At the hearing, Applicant was unable to explain the legal basis for the 
litigation about the lien. He has not made any further attempts to have the lien released. 
(Tr. 40.)  
 
Applicant disclosed the judgment for a delinquent personal loan, alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.b, in his SCA. He stated that the loan became delinquent because he fell behind on 
his payments during a period of unemployment, and that he was making monthly $200 
payments to satisfy it. (GX 1 at 37.) At the hearing, he testified that the debt was 
incurred through a personal loan for expenses related to his divorce. (Tr. 39, 43.) He 
submitted evidence showing that it was satisfied in April 2014. (AX G.)  
 
 In November 2010, Applicant filed a complaint against the attorney regarding the 
fee dispute. (AX V.) The state attorney grievance commission informed him that his 
complaint raised civil matters that should be addressed by a civil court, not in the 
grievance commission. (AX U.) Applicant testified that he sent emails and made 
telephone calls to the attorney’s office in an effort to resolve the dispute, but he received 
no responses. His last email was in December 2016. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 Applicant earns $4,000-$5,000 per month as an investigator, when he is working. 
His police retirement pay is about $1,100 per month, half of which has been awarded to 
his ex-wife. His disability pay is about $1,300 per month. He testified that he is current 
on all his bills. (Tr. 21-23.) He submitted a personal financial statement reflecting 
monthly net income of about $5,000, expenses of $702, and debt payments of about 
$3,067, leaving a net remainder of about $1,231. (AX Q.) 
 
Applicant has received numerous letters and certificates of appreciation from 
various veterans’ organizations. (AX O.) Four professional colleagues and friends 
submitted letters attesting to his honesty, integrity, reliability, dedication, and hard work. 
(AX P.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
5 
 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly  
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s disclosures in his SCA, answer to the SOR, testimony at the hearing, 
and the documentary evidence submitted by Department Counsel establish the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(b) 
(“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”). The following 
mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was filed 
nine years ago, but it is not yet resolved. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was filed 
ten years ago and satisfied more than three years ago. Both judgments were related to 
Applicant’s divorce. The circumstances make them unlikely to recur, because Applicant 
is not likely to go through another divorce and not likely to hire the same attorney for 
any purpose. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Both debts were caused by Applicant’s marital 
breakup. If he was coerced into signing the confession of judgment on the courthouse 
steps, as he claims, that fact also would be a condition beyond his control. He acted 
responsibly by resolving the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and taking multiple steps to 
resolve the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, albeit unsuccessfully. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has received legal services, but not the 
type of financial counseling contemplated by this mitigating condition. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. It is partially 
established for the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s testimony that he did not 
understand the legal implications of the confession of judgment was plausible and 
credible. He took significant and reasonable steps to resolve the judgment, including 
assigning his profits on the sale of the marital home to the attorney and making 
repeated efforts to resolve the dispute about the amount, if any, required to satisfy the 
judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant has 
documented the basis for his dispute and made significant efforts to resolve it, but it is 
not yet resolved. It is clear from the documentary evidence that the attorney was willing 
to accept $20,000 as full settlement when Applicant signed the “Irrevocable Assignment 
and Transfer in December 2006.” It is not clear why the confession of judgment 
increased the amount due to $26,713 in April 2008. It also is not clear why the attorney 
agreed to release the lien on the marital property in June 2009 but then filed a lien to 
enforce the full amount of the judgment in January 2010. Applicant’s belief that the debt 
was resolved when the property was sold and the lien was released in June 2009 is 
plausible and reasonable. It is clear that the attorney received at least $7,949.83 at 
settlement, but it is not clear whether the payment of $7,102.87 paid to Applicant was 
conveyed to the attorney. It is clear, however, that Applicant has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
 
8 
 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was sincere, candid, and credible at the hearing. He has held a 
security clearance for almost 41 years, apparently without incident. He has a 
remarkable record of public service and heroism. His dispute of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is 
sincere and is not an attempt to avoid a legitimate debt. His naïveté in legal matters was 
a major contributing factor. His unsuccessful attempts to resolve the debt do not raise 
any issues regarding his current trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
