1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-07107 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana between 2009 until at least 2015, after having been 
granted a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on December 19, 
2014. On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on April 23, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
June 30, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on September 26, 2016. On December 
21, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for January 12, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified but did not submit any exhibits. I kept the record open until January 27, 
2017, to enable Applicant to submit documentary evidence. He timely submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
January 24, 2017. 
 
This case was adjudicated under the AG implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. The DOD implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision 
was pending. This decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 
2017. The outcome of this case would have been the same if decided based on the former 
AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old software engineer currently employed by a defense 
contractor. He graduated from college in 2012 with a bachelor’s degree in computer 
science, and was hired by his current employer. (GX 1; Tr. 29-33.)  
 
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency between 2009 and 2015, and that he intends to use marijuana in the future. 
The SOR further alleges that applicant was arrested in 2014 and charged with possession 
of marijuana and marijuana paraphernalia. Applicant admits each allegation in the SOR. 
 
Applicant was first granted his first security clearance in 2008. He held clearances 
off and on throughout his college years for various summer internships. He received his 
current clearance in 2012. He began purchasing and using marijuana while in college in 
2009, and continued to use marijuana until as recently as early 2016. Between 2009 and 
2012, he “smoked fairly often in college, sometimes daily.” After graduating from college 
and beginning work as a full-time defense contractor, Applicant continued to purchase 
and use marijuana, although less frequently, stating that he would sometimes go “a few 
months” without using any marijuana. (GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 18 - 19.) 
 
On April 20, 2014, Applicant was pulled over by the local police. Applicant thinks 
that he was initially stopped due to a burned-out headlight, however, he was extremely 
nervous while speaking to the officer, and the officer requested permission from Applicant 
to search his vehicle. Applicant consented, and the officer found marijuana and marijuana 
paraphernalia, and placed applicant in handcuffs. Applicant was charged with possession 
of cannabis, possession of drug paraphernalia, and driving a vehicle in an unsafe 
condition. The officer issued Applicant a summons to appear in court and released him. 
Applicant hired an attorney, appeared in court, and was sentenced to 25 hours community 
service and six months of unsupervised probation. Upon successful completion of these 
requirements, the charges were dismissed. (GX 4; Tr. 35 - 37.) Applicant self-reported 
this arrest to his facility security officer. (Tr. 34.) 
 
Following his arrest, Applicant continued to use marijuana. (GX 1; GX 2.) Applicant 
stated that “after getting arrested [he] had either slowed down, you know, quit for a while 
3 
 
and then… be over to somebody’s house and some would get passed so I would accept.” 
(Tr. 21.) While Applicant still associates with people who use marijuana, he avoids 
situations where people are actively using marijuana, stating that he tries, “to limit 
exposure to the substance.” (Tr. 22 – 23.) 
 
Applicant testified that he no longer uses marijuana. He thinks his last use of 
marijuana was in January 2016. (Tr. 21.) Applicant testified that after disclosing his arrest 
to his security officer, Applicant’s security officer explained the potential negative 
ramifications of continued use of marijuana on Applicant’s career, and that this discussion 
had a significant impact on his attitude and understanding of the pitfalls of continuing to 
use marijuana. (Tr. 18 -19.) However, Applicant continued to use marijuana for almost 
two more years. Applicant also stated that should policies change, or if he is on leave, or 
if he is no longer employed in the defense industry, he might use marijuana in the future. 
(Answer; Tr. 17-18; GX 2.) After the hearing, Applicant submitted a signed, notarized, 
statement of his intention not to use any illegal substances while holding a security 
clearance, and agreeing to the automatic revocation of his security clearance should he 
do so. (AX A.) 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
4 
 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
 The illegal use of controlled substances . . . can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to 
physical or psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish the 
potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) any substance misuse; 
 
AG ¶ 25(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
5 
 
 
The following mitigating conditions may also apply: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment were drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed a statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana is recent and casts doubt on his current judgment. 
Applicant started using marijuana after he had completed a security clearance 
application, undergone a background investigation, and worked as an intern for a defense 
contractor. He continued to use marijuana, sometimes daily, throughout college, despite 
regularly working in summer-intern positions which required a security clearance. After 
graduating from college in 2012, completing another security clearance application, 
undergoing another background investigation, and becoming a full-time federal 
contractor, he continued to use marijuana, albeit with less frequency than in college. 
Despite his arrest in 2014 for possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia, and his 
completion of yet another security clearance application, as well as his interview with a 
background investigator, Applicant continued to use marijuana until late 2015 or early 
2016.  
 
 The Directive does not define “recent,” and there is no “bright-line” definition of 
what constitutes "recent" conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). 
The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a reasonable 
conclusion as to the recency of an applicant's conduct. ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 
(App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006). This relatively short period of abstinence, compared to the eight 
years that Applicant used marijuana, combined with his use while holding a security 
clearance and after his arrest, is insufficient to mitigate the concern.   
Applicant’s signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement in the 
future carries little weight. While Applicant credibly testified that he has not used 
marijuana since late 2015 or early 2016, he also testified that, under different 
circumstances, such as changes in policy, being on leave, or no longer working as a 
defense contractor, he might use marijuana in the future. Applicant actively avoids 
situations where people are using marijuana, however, he still associates with people who 
6 
 
use marijuana. Given that Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance, 
his continued use following his 2014 arrest, the recentness of his last use, and his stated 
willingness to consider future use, it is simply too soon to unequivocally conclude that 
Applicant has changed his pattern of behavior and will not use marijuana again while 
holding a security clearance.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis 
and have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his illegal drug use. Accordingly, I conclude he has failed to carry his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
