 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-00846 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.1 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 25, 2012. On 
September 26, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F.2 
 
                                                     
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known as 
a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
 
2 The DOD CAF acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on December 1, 2016. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 19, 2016. No additional 
evidence was submitted in response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits included 
in the FORM (Items 1 to 10) are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me 
on October 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old information technology support coordinator employed by 
a defense contractor since June 2012, and she has operated a part-time small business 
out of her home since 2010. She was unemployed from June 2009 to June 2010. She 
received an associate’s degree in 2007. She was married in 1996 and divorced in 2008, 
and has one adult child. 
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts, totaling about $5,259, and failure to timely 
file federal income tax returns for 2003 to 2006, and state income taxes for 2003 to 2009. 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations with explanations, except 
she was unaware of a collection account from 2009 involving a check issued with 
insufficient funds. All of the SOR allegations are supported by sufficient evidence 
submitted by the Government. 
 
 Applicant stated in her response to the SOR, that she had erroneous information 
and was unable to file her income tax returns as required. She stated her federal taxes 
have been paid, and she filed state tax returns for 2007 and 2008. In regards to her 
delinquent debts, Applicant noted in her answer to the SOR, that she is disputing a 
medical debt for $1,350 (SOR ¶ 1.c), and will dispute another medical debt for $596 (SOR 
¶ 1.e), but she did not indicate the basis for the dispute. She also noted that a credit card 
debt for $1,788 was charged off because of a financial hardship she encountered when 
her domestic partner lost his job. Another account for $668 was placed in collection 
because she was paying other bills. No documentary evidence was provided with her 
answer or in response to the FORM to support her assertions. 
 
Applicant noted in her answer, that she is a single mother who is paying a 
mortgage, car loan, utilities and other household expenses on her own. She stated that 
she has paid all outstanding taxes owed, and would like to consolidate her debts into a 
lower monthly payment. She stressed her personal integrity and her loyalty to her 
employer. 
 
 
3 
 
 Since Applicant elected to have this case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, I was unable to further inquire into these allegations, or evaluate her demeanor 
or credibility in response to questions about the status of her debts and current finances. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017.3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
                                                     
3 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file . . . annual federal, state, or local income tax returns . . . as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence supporting the SOR 
allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and there is insufficient evidence to 
determine that they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
Applicant failed to show efforts toward resolving her debts. This pattern shows a lack of 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. 
 
Although Applicant was unemployed for a year from 2009 to 2010, she began a 
business in 2010 and was employed full-time with her current employer in 2012. Applicant 
has not carried her burden of proof to show that she has adequately addressed her 
delinquent debts and filed tax returns as required. She alluded in her answer to the SOR 
to a loss of household income as a reason for one of her debts, but she did not show 
evidence to support her claimed hardship, or documentary evidence that she attempted 
to or has addressed the tax and debt issues alleged. 
 
Applicant’s personal circumstances, including periods of unemployment and a loss 
of household income, were conditions beyond her control. She did not take responsible 
actions after these events to deal with her debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. There 
is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling or that her current financial 
status is sound. The delinquent debts remain unaddressed. Applicant’s financial problems 
are not under control. Evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve her debts is lacking. 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. She failed to document any disputed debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. Likewise, she did not provide evidence that her delinquent tax 
returns were filed or that she made other arrangements with tax authorities. AG ¶ 20(g) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
6 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s delinquencies remain an ongoing concern. Although she may have 
taken some action to address her delinquent tax filings and some debts, she failed to 
provide documentary evidence of such action or a final resolution. Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
security interests of the United States to grant her eligibility to hold a sensitive position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Eligibility for a public 
trust position is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
