 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02154 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
The Government did not establish the facts alleged under the personal conduct 
guideline. Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on October 
20, 2016, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on November 2, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on November 16, 2016. 
As of January 25, 2017, she had not responded. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
October 1, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in 
evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since November 2014. She has a bachelor’s degree and a 
master’s degree, and as of October 2016, she was attending post-graduate school in 
pursuit of a doctorate. She is married with five children between the ages of 33 and 21, 
and three adult stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. She filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
case in August 2007, and her debts were discharged in January 2008. She continued to 
have financial difficulties after the bankruptcy discharge.2 
 
 The SOR alleges the bankruptcy and 24 delinquent debts. However, SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
and 1.q, are duplicate accounts representing the same debt. SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.t are 
duplicate medical debts, as are SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.u. The SOR also alleges a debt that 
Applicant is not responsible for because she is only an authorized user on the account 
(SOR ¶ 1.r). The non-duplicate allegations include 2 charged-off auto loans totaling 
$16,567; 12 medical debts totaling $2,689; and 6 miscellaneous delinquent debts 
totaling $5,446. The debts are established through Applicant’s admissions and credit 
reports.3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing all the debts with the exception of the $1,393 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. She indicated the company did not finish their job and damaged 
her home. She stated that the charged-off auto loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n resulted after 
the company sold her a bad car that stopped in the middle of the highway.4 
 
 Applicant has a large family. There is no information in the record about the 
cause of Applicant’s financial problems, or even if it was related to having a large family. 
She wrote in her response to the SOR that she was paying a $595 doctor bill, which she 
had reduced to $270. She did not submit any supporting documentation. She wrote that 
it was her “clear intent to continue on this path so that [she] can eliminate all past 
debts.” She is current on a $28,400 auto loan with $485 monthly payments, which she 
incurred in March 2016. She has $107,000 in deferred student loans.5 Because she did 
not respond to the FORM, little is known about how Applicant intends to address her 
financial issues. 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 1, 3, 4. 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4. 
 
4 Items 1, 3, 4. 
 
5 Items 1-4. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
December 2014.6 She answered “No” to all of the financial questions under Section 26, 
which included the following: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you possessions or property voluntarily or 
involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed? (Include financial obligations for 
which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a 
cosigner or guarantor).7 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you defaulted on any type of loan. (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosigner or guarantor).8   
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosigner or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosigner 
or guarantor).9   
 
You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosigner or guarantor)10     
 
Applicant had at least one car repossessed. She knew she had defaulted on 
loans and that she was more than 120 days delinquent on debts. However, I am not 
convinced that she knew that a debt was turned over to a collection agency or that she 
had an “account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed,” which are the only two questions alleged in the SOR. I find there is insufficient 
evidence that Applicant intentionally falsified the specific questions alleged in the SOR.  
 
                                                          
6 Item 2. 
 
7 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified this question.  
 
8 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified this question.  
 
9 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified this question.  
 
10 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified this question.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as follows:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts. 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in August 2007, and her debts were 
discharged in January 2008. She had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling 
to pay. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Applicant is only an authorized user on the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r and not 
responsible for the debt. SOR ¶ 1.r is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 The following are duplicate accounts: SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.q; SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.t; 
and SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.u. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3. SOR ¶¶ 1.q, 1.t, 
and 1.u are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 There is no information in the record about the cause of Applicant’s financial 
problems, or even if it was related to having a large family. She wrote, without 
supporting documentation, that she was paying a $595 doctor bill, which she had 
reduced to $270. She is current on a $28,400 auto loan with $485 monthly payments, 
which she incurred in March 2016, and she owes $107,000 in deferred student loans. 
She wrote that it was her “clear intent to continue on this path so that [she] can 
eliminate all past debts.” The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in 
the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)). Because she did not respond 
to the FORM, little is known about how Applicant intends to address her financial 
issues, particularly in light of the student loans that will eventually come out of 
deferment. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(d) are not applicable. Applicant indicated that she was justified in not paying one 
debt because the company did not finish their job and damaged her home, but she did 
not provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence that Applicant intentionally falsified the specific 
questions alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude the Government 
did not establish the facts alleged under the personal conduct guideline, and Applicant 
did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q-1.r:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t-1.u:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.v-1.y:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
