1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01653 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 26, 2014. On 
June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 6, 2016, and elected to have the case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting 
documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department 
Counsel on August 22, 2016. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 6, 2016. He submitted a letter in 
response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 4), 
and the Applicant’s exhibit (AE) marked as AE A, are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on May 19, 2017. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about 
Afghanistan. (HE 1) The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of 
Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in 
Afghanistan in 1984. He is a high school graduate. He married in Afghanistan in 2009 to a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. They have no children. He was sponsored for immigration by his 
spouse, and moved to the United States in 2010. Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen 
in December 2013, and, with that act, renounced his Afghan citizenship.  
 
Applicant is a linguist/interpreter for a U.S. government contractor. He was previously 
employed as an interpreter in support of international security assistance forces (ISAF) in 
Afghanistan from March 2007 to November 2010, while he was an Afghan national. He 
stated that he again deployed to Afghanistan in about 2014, in support of U.S. forces, 
although the dates and type of work done in Afghanistan are unclear. 
 
Applicant’s mother and father are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. His mother 
is a homemaker, and his father is a retired grocer who does not receive a pension or 
government assistance. Applicant speaks to them about once per month, and he sends 
them about $200 per month to assist them with living expenses. Applicant has four brothers 
and one sister who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. Applicant’s sister has five 
children and is a school teacher. Two of his brothers are teachers. He describes his other 
two brothers as businessmen that occupy themselves with “land work” and the grocery 
business. He speaks to some of his siblings about once per month when he calls to speak 
to his parents. 
 
Applicant noted his dedication, honesty and loyalty to the United States since 
becoming a citizen, especially given his work with U.S. forces in Afghanistan. He did not 
provide documentation of the frequency and character of his work in Afghanistan, or letters 
of recommendation, awards, or certificates resulting from that work. Also, the record does 
not contain documentary evidence of Applicant’s U.S. assets or other ties to the United 
States. Since Applicant elected to have this case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, I was unable to further inquire into the SOR allegations. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia that is approximately the size of Texas 
(249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran borders it on the 
west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country which has been fought 
over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population was about 28 million people 
with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan. 
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically-elected president. 
Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Soviet Union 
in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union withdrew from 
Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and religious militias. By the 
end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing 
aggressive and repressive policies. 
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. 
 
A U.S. State Department Travel Warning remains in effect. The State Department 
warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats 
by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel to all areas of Afghanistan remains 
unsafe due to the ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, 
landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct 
and indirect fire, suicide bombings and insurgent attacks, including attacks using vehicle-
borne or other improvised explosive devices (IEDs). Attacks may also target official Afghan 
and U.S. governmental convoys and compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, 
and other public areas. 
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State of Iraq and 
the Levant - Khorasan Province (ISKP) and members of other armed opposition groups are 
active throughout the country. ISKP has shown its operational capability, having attacked 
both Afghan and foreign government facilities. The Taliban and its affiliates routinely attack 
Afghan, Coalition, and U.S. targets with little regard for civilian casualties. 
 
Due to security concerns, unofficial travel to Afghanistan by U.S. government 
employees and their family members is restricted and requires prior approval from the State 
Department. According to the State Department’s 2015 Country Reports on Terrorism, 
Afghanistan continued to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the Taliban, 
including the Haqqani Network and other insurgent and terrorist groups. The Haqqani 
Network continued to plan and conduct high profile attacks and assassinations against U.S., 
Coalition and Afghan interests, particularly in Kabul and other key government centers. 
 
According to the State Department, the border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan 
remains a safe haven for terrorists. It is an under-governed area that terrorists exploit to 
conduct attacks in both countries. Terrorist groups active in Afghanistan, such as al-Qa’ida 
(AQ), the Haqqani Network and others, operate in Afghanistan and Pakistan. ISIL-Khorasan 
(ISIL-K) is largely based in Afghanistan, but its support network also reaches into Pakistan's 
4 
 
tribal areas along the border. The Afghan government has struggled to assert control over 
this remote terrain where the population is largely detached from national institutions. 
 
According to the U.S. Defense Department's June 2016 report on Afghanistan, 
although al-Qa’ida’s core leadership in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region has been 
degraded, elements continue to seek safe haven on both sides of the border to regenerate 
and conduct attack planning. The continued development of an al-Qa’ida affiliate in the 
region (al-Qa’ida in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS)), highlights the dynamic nature of the 
terrorist and militant landscape of the region, posing risks to the mission and to U.S. 
interests. 
 
In its annual Human Rights Report for  2015, the U.S. Department of State reported 
that the most significant human rights problems in Afghanistan during the year were 
widespread violence, armed insurgent groups' attacks on civilians and killing of persons 
affiliated with government, torture and abuse of detainees by government forces; 
widespread disregard for the rule of law, and little accountability for those who conduct 
human rights abuses, as well as targeted violence and societal discrimination against 
women and girls. 
 
The United States’ extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against the 
inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan to its citizens and residents and 
Afghan Government problems developing and complying with the rule of law. A top national 
security goal of the United States is to establish relationships, cooperation, training, and 
support of the Afghanistan Government and military in the ongoing war against terrorism. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective for all decisions issued after June 8, 
2017. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to “control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access 
to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, discretion, 
character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not 
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being 
eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help 
a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent 
with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should 
consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest is located, 
6 
 
including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is known to 
target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in 
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create 
a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or 
technology. 
 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen who maintains regular monthly contact with his parents and 
one or more of his siblings who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. He sends $200 
per month to his parents to assist them with living expenses. In addition, he travels to 
Afghanistan to serve as an interpreter for international and U.S. forces, a highly risky and 
dangerous profession that may put him in direct contact with enemy forces or intelligence 
operatives fighting against the United States and allied forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03- 02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). There is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their 
immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 
94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil liberties, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the government is 
engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of death or property 
damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the 
United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United States, places a significant, 
but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member living in Afghanistan. 
7 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his relatives who are foreign citizens or living in 
Afghanistan create a potential conflict of interest because of the potential for pressure to be 
placed on his family living in Afghanistan in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise 
classified information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with family who are citizens of Afghanistan and 
has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and  
(b), apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or are 
approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, 
or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Based on the record, there is insufficient evidence to fully apply any of the mitigating 
conditions. Applicant has frequent contact with his parents and some siblings, who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States.” Applicant 
immigrated to the United States in 2010, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2013. His spouse 
lives in the United States and she is a U.S. citizen. 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s years of support to ISAF and DOD in Afghanistan as a linguist/translator, 
including the dangers that service may entail, weigh heavily towards mitigating security 
concerns. Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. Applicant’s parents and siblings currently live in Afghanistan. Like 
every other resident of Afghanistan, they are at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. 
 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower and 
money in Afghanistan, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in 
Afghanistan. Applicant and his relatives living in Afghanistan are potential targets of 
terrorists and the Taliban, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information could 
theoretically add risk to his relatives living in Afghanistan from lawless elements in 
Afghanistan. 
 
Applicant has frequent contact with his family, and he regularly sends money to his 
parents to help support them. Applicant has not shown evidence of “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States.” His patriotism is not being questioned, 
rather he has not shown that his ties to the U.S. outweigh his familial interests in Afghanistan, 
especially given his professional work in Afghanistan. The record evidence has not been 
sufficiently developed in Applicant’s favor. His request for an administrative decision without 
a hearing and his failure to provide documentary evidence of the character and quality of his 
work for U.S. forces, and his financial ties to the U.S., leave me with little discretion to find 
in his favor. 
 
 Applicant’s marriage to a U.S. citizen and the sparse description of his term of work 
for ISAF and U.S. forces in Afghanistan, taken together, are insufficient to fully overcome 
the foreign influence security concerns. Foreign influence concerns under Guideline B are 
not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
9 
 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.2 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to threaten the 
Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. armed forces, and those who 
cooperate and assist the United States. The Afghan Government does not fully comply with 
the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States and Afghan 
Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2010, and became a U.S. citizen in 2013. 
When he became a U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance to the United States. However, 
the record is devoid of information about the character of his overseas work and the personal 
risks he may have taken in support of U.S. forces. Without additional information in the form 
of testimony, character letters, awards and certificates, I am unable to apply significant credit 
for his service in support of U.S. combat forces in Afghanistan. Additionally, he has not 
provided evidence of his financial or other ties to the United States. His frequent contact with 
family in Afghanistan and financial support for his parents are a manifestation of his care 
and concern for them, and are admirable qualities. However, in the context of security law, 
those relationships raise important foreign influence security concerns, and they must be 
balanced against his connections to the United States. In a future application for a security 
clearance with additional evidence as described above, it is possible that Applicant can show 
sufficient mitigation, however, the sparse record as presented here, does not overcome the 
Guideline B concerns raised in the SOR. 
 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence security concerns raised in the 
SOR. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient discussion 
of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.e - 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
