 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01132 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. He refuted the security concerns 
under Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, Guideline F, financial considerations, and 
Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and 
are effective for decisions issued after that date. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 2, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on November 2, 
2016. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 through 5 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a through 2.e, 2.h, and 2.m. 
He denied the remaining allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He earned a General Equivalency Diploma. He is not 
married. He has three children. He disclosed one period of unemployment on his security 
clearance application (SCA) from August 2007 to March 2009. He has worked for his 
present employer, a federal contractor, since May 2013.1  
 
 Applicant disclosed in his September 2014 SCA that he was employed as a driver 
from May 2010 to July 2012. He stated the reason he left the job was “got let go for taking 
company gas card an[d] filling up my vehicle . . . fired.” He also stated “fired for taking 
company fuel card to fill up my vehicle.”2  
 
Applicant confirmed during his background investigation with a government 
investigator that he was fired from his job for using a company fuel card to fill up his 
personal vehicle with gasoline. He told the investigator that his ex-girlfriend, after they 
broke up, called his employer to inform them about what Applicant was doing. He told the 
government investigator that his ex-girlfriend also used the card to fill up her car multiple 
times with gas. Applicant told the government investigator that he was subsequently 
confronted by his employer and fired.3  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that his employer confronted him 
about the unauthorized use of the gas card. He stated he was told he could admit the 
allegation and go home or if they found out the allegation was true he would be fired. He 
stated, “I was already mad so I got up and quit.” He stated in his SOR answer that his 
employer “never [k]new I was getting gas. I walked out and quit before anything had 
happened.”4 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 2.  
 
2 Item 2.  
 
3 Item 5. 
 
4 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 2015 and charged with driving while intoxicated 
(DWI); carrying a concealed weapon; refused blood/breath test; reckless driving; and 
failure to wear a seatbelt. He was found guilty of DWI and carrying a concealed weapon. 
He was sentenced to 12 months in jail, suspended; to pay a $500 fine; 12 months 
suspension of his driver’s license; and ordered to complete 10 Alcohol Safety Action 
Program (ASAP) education classes. He was placed on probation and was required to 
have an ignition interlock on his vehicle for six months.5 In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that he had one bad night when he was arrested. He stated the handgun 
in the car did not belong to him, but belonged to his friend. It was located in a jacket in 
Applicant’s car. He admitted he made a mistake. No other information was provided.6 
 
 In March 2015, Applicant was charged and found guilty of driving with 
revoked/suspended license. He was fined $500. In his SOR answer, he indicated he had 
paid this fine in March 2016 with his federal income tax refund.7  
 
 Credit reports from October 2014, February 2016, and Applicant’s admissions 
substantiated the judgments and delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.8 The SOR alleged 
five judgments (¶ 2.j - $1,326, filed May 2010; ¶ 2.k - $2,488, filed April 2012; ¶ 2.l - 
$11,501, filed February 2014; ¶ 2.m - $5,110, filed August 2014; and ¶ 2.n - $1,789, filed 
October 2014). During Applicant’s June 2015 background interview with a government 
investigator, he was confronted with the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.j, 2.k, and 2.l. He 
was unfamiliar with those judgments and advised the investigator that he would research 
them and pay them through a payment plan. In his answer to the SOR, he stated he did 
not know what the judgment was for in SOR ¶ 2.j. He acknowledged the judgment in SOR 
¶ 2.k, but stated he paid it in full. Regarding the judgment in SOR ¶ 2.l, he indicated he 
and his father have the same name and this judgment “sounds like an account”9 his father 
had. He further stated, “I’m just now seeing this on my account.”10 He acknowledged the 
judgment in SOR ¶ 2.m and stated that money was tight and he got behind in payments.11 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he satisfied or resolved any of the alleged 
judgments or took actions to research or dispute them. 
                                                          
5 SOR ¶ 1.a alleged the January 2015 criminal offenses and that Applicant had not completed all of the 
conditions of his sentence, to include that he had not paid the fine. No evidence was presented by the 
Government to support that he had not completed the terms of his sentence and that the fine was unpaid. 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleged that Applicant failed to pay fines imposed for his conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
The Government did not provide evidence to support this allegation, and I find in Applicant’s favor.  
 
6 Item 1.  
 
7 In Applicant’s SOR answer he refers to “all my court fines” were paid. It is unknown if he is also referring 
to the fine imposed for the January 2015 DWI and carrying a concealed weapon charges.  
 
8 Items 1, 3, 4, 5. 
 
9 Item 1. 
 
10 Item 1. 
 
11 Items 1, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
 As stated above, Applicant admitted some of the SOR debts and denied others. 
He stated that he had paid some of the debts, but he did not provide any supporting 
documentation to verify the debts are resolved or being resolved.  
 
Applicant denied some debts because he was unfamiliar with them or disputed 
them for various reasons. He did not provide any substantiating evidence of actions he 
may have taken to resolve the disputes, contact the creditors, or provide documents to 
show the debts were resolved.12  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he never really cared to check his 
credit report. He stated, “Some of this information is a miscue, but some of my credit is 
also a lack of me keeping my agreement which totally falls on me an[d] I need to do a 
way better job of keeping my agreements.”13 He also stated that he was unaware that 
certain delinquent accounts were in collection or he believed others were older than seven 
years and he did not have to report them. Applicant stated that he is making an effort to 
improve his credit by obtaining a secured credit card, and he has made his monthly 
payments on time. He also stated, “now that I have records of my credit I will work hard 
to try to get everything caught up.”14 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his September 2014 SCA 
when he failed to disclose that he had judgments entered against him; that he had debts 
turned over to a collection agency; and that he had accounts or credit cards suspended, 
charged off or canceled for failing to pay as agreed. I have carefully considered all of 
those facts. I believe Applicant was aware that he was behind in paying bills and some of 
his debts were delinquent. However, I find there is insufficient evidence to conclude he 
was aware that some of his debts were turned over to collection agencies or were charged 
off, suspended, or canceled for failing to pay as agreed. There is also insufficient evidence 
to conclude that Applicant was aware at the time he completed his SCA that some debts 
resulted in judgments. I find there is insufficient evidence to find that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his SCA by failing to disclose the above information.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
12 Item 1. 
 
13 Item 1.  
 
14 Item 1. 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
6 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee 
theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing deceptive 
loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
 Applicant has unpaid judgments and delinquent accounts dating back to at least 
2010 that he has been unable or unwilling to pay and remain unresolved. There is 
sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant misused his employer’s gas card for his 
personal vehicle and was fired because of his actions. The evidence supports the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant did not provide supporting documentary evidence that he has paid or 
resolved any of the judgments or delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. His financial issues 
are ongoing. He did not provide evidence regarding his current finances or ability to pay 
his delinquent debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. Applicant admitted in his SCA and to the government investigator that 
he was using his employer’s gas card for his private vehicle. This conduct raises 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to overcome these concerns. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not provide information that his failure to pay or resolve his delinquent 
debts and judgments were due to conditions that were largely beyond his control. He has 
been employed by his present employer since 2013. He did not provide evidence that he 
has acted responsibly in addressing his debts. There is no evidence that Applicant has 
received financial counseling and there are not clear indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or under control. No evidence was presented to show 
Applicant has initiated and is adhering to good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed several of the alleged debts because he was either unfamiliar 
with them, he thought they were someone else’s responsibility, or because he had paid 
them. He did not provide documentary evidence to substantiate the basis of his disputes 
or evidence of his actions to resolve them. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 31, and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
 
8 
 
 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
 In January 2015, Applicant was arrested for DWI, carrying a concealed weapon, 
refused blood/breath test, reckless driving, and failure to wear a seatbelt. He was later 
convicted of DWI and carrying a concealed weapon. He was sentenced to 12 months in 
jail, which was suspended; ordered to pay a $500 fine; his driver’s license was suspended 
for 12 months; and he was required to complete 10 ASAP education classes. He was 
placed on probation for one year. In March 2015, he was charged with driving on a 
revoked/suspended license and was fined. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Shortly after Applicant’s January 2015 DWI and carrying a concealed weapon 
arrest, he was arrested for driving on a revoked or suspended license. Applicant’s 
subsequent arrest is a concern because of the nature of the offense and its timing shortly 
after his January arrest. A DWI conviction is serious, and coupled with carrying a 
concealed weapon conviction it raises questions about Applicant’s good judgment. He 
received a 12-month jail sentence and was on probation for a year, also reflecting the 
seriousness of the offenses. Insufficient time has passed to conclude that similar behavior 
is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 32(a) has minimal application. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence of successful rehabilitation. He did not provide evidence of a good employment 
record, compliance with the terms of his probation, constructive community involvement, 
or if he continues to associate with the person he claimed owned the handgun that was 
found in his car. AG ¶ 32(d) has minimal application. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 31, and one that may be 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence and conclude it is insufficient to conclude that 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose he had judgments or that he was aware that 
accounts had been turned over to a collections agency, charged off, suspended, or 
canceled. The above disqualifying condition does not apply. I find Applicant successfully 
refuted the Guideline E, personal conduct allegations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
10 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines J, F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 28 years old. He has numerous judgments and delinquent debts that 
are unpaid or unresolved. He misused his employer’s gas credit card for his personal 
benefit. He was convicted in 2015 of DWI, carrying a concealed weapon, and driving on 
a suspended or revoked license. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. He refuted the 
personal conduct concerns alleged under Guideline E.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.p:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Refuted 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:  Refuted 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
