 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02322 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 15, 2015. On 
October 11, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 Applicant answered the SOR on November 16, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on December 21, 2016. 
 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 5, 2017. She did not submit 
a response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 
5) are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old electronics technician employed by a defense contractor 
since 2013. She previously worked for other federal contractors from 2004 to 2012. She 
received her high school diploma in 1975. She was married in 1978 and widowed in 1987. 
She has four children, all of whom are adults. She has previously held a DOD security 
clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file her 2009 and 2010 federal and state 
income tax returns, and failed to file her federal and state income tax returns when due 
for tax years 2011 to 2015. She admitted all of the SOR allegations. 
 
In November 2015, the Government requested Applicant obtain IRS and state tax 
transcripts for tax years 2009 to 2014. In response, Applicant submitted a 2009 IRS 
transcript showing she did not file a return, but that she did not owe any tax, penalties or 
interest. She did not file a 2010 return, and no transcript was available. She submitted a 
2011 IRS transcript showing she filed her return in June 2015; a 2012 transcript showing 
her return was filed in March 2016; and 2013 and 2014 transcripts showing her tax returns 
were filed in February 2016. She received about $9,200 in Federal tax refunds for tax 
years 2011 to 2014, and did not owe any penalties or interest. 
 
Applicant also provided evidence showing that she did not file state income tax 
returns for 2009 and 2010; she filed her 2011 return in April 2014; and she filed her 2012 
to 2014 state income tax returns in January 2016. She did not owe state taxes except for 
$5 owed on her 2011 return. She ascribed her failure to file tax returns on poor time 
management and disorganization primarily due to working overtime, the eight-hour trip to 
tend to her mother during her illness and settling the estate after her death in 2014, and 
her own 120-mile daily work commute. 
 
Applicant took responsibility for failing to file her tax returns as required. Beginning 
in 2015, she filed all returns since 2011, the years in which she had available tax reporting 
documents, and vowed to refrain from filing late tax returns in the future. She increased 
her tax withholding in each paycheck to ensure she would not owe any additional taxes 
at the end of the year. During the tax years she did not file returns, she did not owe any 
Federal or state taxes. Rather, after filing her late returns, she received a sizable refund. 
There is no evidence that she has had a lien placed on her property or a garnishment 
order issued against her for taxes. 
 
 Applicant expressed regret for jeopardizing her security clearance and apologized 
for her tax-filing mistakes. She described her work as very important to her, and she is 
 
3 
 
proud of her service to the government. She considers working overtime to accomplish 
the mission as her patriotic duty. Her late husband and her son served in combat in the 
U.S. Marine Corps. She has no reported delinquent debts, owns her own home, and has 
about $148,000 in assets. She has a net monthly remainder of about $662 after paying 
expenses and a car loan. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. These AGs are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
4 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to file her Federal and state tax returns when due. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant did not show that her failure to file tax returns resulted from a condition 
beyond her control, however she has taken action to correct the problem. She began an 
effort to file all past-due tax returns in 2015, and completed it in 2016. She is now current 
on filing Federal and state tax returns since 2011, and vowed to remain so. During the 
period she did not file on time, she did not owe taxes, rather she received over $9,000 in 
refunds. The 2009 and 2010 tax returns are not likely to be filed as Applicant alluded that 
documents necessary to do so are unavailable, and the tax authorities have not required 
it. The record does not reflect any financial delinquencies, and Applicant owns a home 
and has sufficient income to meet her needs. She is a widow and her mother’s illness and 
death in 2014 was a significant event in her life, occupying her time and attention. I am 
convinced Applicant now has a renewed understanding of the importance of filing her tax 
returns when due, and will do so going forward. 
 
Although failing to file tax returns, even when nothing is owed, does not reflect the 
level of financial responsibility and compliance with rules and regulations expected of a 
person holding a security clearance, the record reflects that Applicant rectified the matter 
and expressed the intent to comply with tax-filing responsibilities in the future. Her tax 
issues have been resolved, and her current financial status is stable. AG ¶ 20 (g) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant filed tax 
returns since 2011 and is up to date on her filings. She resolved the delinquent tax returns 
that she could reasonably file to date, and does not owe any unpaid taxes. 
 
 
6 
 
Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant her eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
