 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02884 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Terri R. Zimmermann, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, criminal conduct and Guideline D, sexual behavior. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct and Guideline D, sexual behavior. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 2, 2016, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on January 27, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 15, 2017, and the hearing 
was held as scheduled on April 12, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
Exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) II. Applicant testified and offered exhibits 
(AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 19, 2017. 
 
Motion in Limine--Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 On April 4, 2017, Department Counsel submitted a written motion in limine to 
preclude admission of Applicant’s evidence that intended to controvert Applicant’s 2014 
General Court-Martial conviction for rape. I granted the motion prohibiting Applicant 
from re-litigating his court-martial conviction. I allowed admission of evidence related to 
Applicant’s character during his Air Force career and thereafter. I specifically denied 
admission of evidence that attacked the veracity of the victim of Applicant’s rape 
conviction.2     
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer, he admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with 
explanations. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is divorced and has two children. He has worked for 
a defense contractor since June 2015. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 
1996 until his court-martial in August 2014. He is currently in appellate leave status 
pending the final appellate review of his General Court-Martial conviction in 2014. 
During his military career, he deployed to Afghanistan and Iraq. He has two master’s 
degrees.3   
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was convicted of rape (criminal conduct) in August 
2014 by General Court-Martial (SOR ¶ 1.a). This conduct was cross alleged as sexual 
behavior under Guideline D in the SOR. (SOR ¶ 2.a)  
  
 Sometime between July 2013 and August 2014, Applicant, who was at the time 
an active duty lieutenant colonel pilot in the Air Force, was charged with rape in violation 
of Article 120 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). The charges stemmed 
                                                          
2 Tr. 9-22; HE I (Department Counsel’s written motion in limine, including enclosures 1-4), HE III through 
VI (Applicant’s appeal briefs and related documents submitted to the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) and to the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces (CAAF). 
 
3 Tr. 38-41, 49; GE 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
from an incident that occurred in 2005. The victim alleged Applicant raped her when 
both were together on a temporary duty assignment. The victim (an enlisted subordinate 
of Applicant at the time of the incident) had recently come forward about the incident 
while undergoing sexual assault and awareness training. Applicant was tried on the 
rape charge by a General Court-Martial in August 2014. Applicant was represented by 
civilian and military counsel at the court-martial, waived his right to be tried by a panel of 
military officers, choosing instead to be tried by a military judge, pleaded not guilty, and 
testified at trial. He denied raping the victim claiming the sex was consensual (he 
admitted committing the UCMJ offenses of adultery and fraternization). The victim 
testified for the Government. After hearing all the evidence presented, the military judge 
convicted Applicant of the rape charge. He was sentenced to a dismissal, confinement 
for five months and a reprimand. The convening authority (an Air Force Lieutenant 
General) approved the findings of guilt and the sentence in November 2014.4  
  
 Applicant’s case was automatically appealed to the Air Force Court of Criminal 
Appeals (AFCCA), which issued an unpublished opinion in June 2016. The opinion 
concluded that “the approved findings and sentence are correct in law and fact, and no 
error materially prejudicial to the substantial rights of the Appellant occurred.” The 
AFCCA affirmed the findings and sentence approved by the convening authority. On 
October 16, 2016, Applicant’s petition to the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Armed Forces (CAAF) for review was granted solely on the procedural issue of whether 
the AFCCA panel that heard Applicant’s case was properly constituted. On December 
1, 2016, CAAF denied Applicant’s petition for review on any other issues.5  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant claimed his innocence to the rape charge. He admitted 
engaging in adultery and fraternization. He also admitted committing adultery on other 
occasions after 2005, while in the Air Force. When he raped the victim in 2005, his wife 
was pregnant. He and his wife divorced in October 2015.6  
 
 Applicant was evaluated by a clinical psychologist who prepared a report in 
August 2014, which was submitted to the military judge during the sentencing portion of 
Applicant’s court-martial. Applicant also submitted the same report as part of his Answer 
in this case. Applicant was given a series of tests and his behavior was observed over 
the course of five days. The psychologist concluded that Applicant “has a variety of 
positive factors suggesting exceptional rehabilitation potential as well as excellent 
prognosis for avoiding further sexual offenses.”7  
 
 Applicant presented four reference letters from colleagues and his priest. Two of 
the colleagues refer to his rape conviction as a one-time mistake. They described his 
                                                          
4 GE 2-3. 
 
5 HE I (encls. 1-4), HE III-IV. 
 
6 Tr. 54-55, 57-58. 
 
7 Answer. 
 
 
4 
 
 
skills as a pilot and potential simulator instructor. They believe he is loyal and a good 
leader. They feel Applicant has learned from his mistake and will not find himself in that 
position in the future. They recommend granting him a security clearance. His priest 
described Applicant’s volunteer activities within the church and believes he is a quality 
person deserving of a security clearance.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
8 AE A-C; Consistent with my ruling on the motion in limine, I also considered the enclosures to 
Applicant’s November 14, 2014 clemency request that were attached to his Answer. 
 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted; and  
 
(e) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces for reasons less than 
"Honorable." 
 
Applicant was convicted of rape by General Court-Martial and was sentenced to 
a dismissal from the Air Force. I find that both disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s act of rape occurred in 2005, but because of his silence and the 
victim’s hesitation to come forward it was not prosecuted until 2014. He claims to be 
rehabilitated, but despite his conviction and appellate review, he has not admitted his 
wrongdoing. It is difficult to determine that rehabilitation has occurred when a person 
refuses to accept responsibility for their past criminal actions. Although applicant has 
made some rehabilitative strides since being released from prison, such as obtaining 
employment and working with his church, his past criminal behavior casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not 
fully apply.   
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for sexual behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of rape by a General Court-Martial. The above 
disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for sexual behavior under 
AG ¶ 14 and considered the following potentially relevant:   
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; 
and 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has received a 
 
7 
 
 
favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional indicating 
the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
 AG ¶ 14(b) does not fully apply as explained above under the criminal conduct 
guideline. Although Applicant was seen by a psychologist before his court-martial, there 
is no evidence in the record to show that he started and completed a treatment plan 
during his confinement or after his release, or that he is currently enrolled in any such 
program. AG ¶ 14(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service, his letters of recommendation, his psychological report, and his personal 
circumstances. However, I also considered that he was convicted of raping an Air Force 
enlisted subordinate. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines J and D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
