 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
           ---------------------------   ) ISCR Case No. 16-01927 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelly, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern raised 
by her problematic financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on December 20, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On September 19, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information.1 It detailed the factual reasons for 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
 
2 
 
the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR, but the Answer is undated. She requested a decision based 
on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On February 10, 2017, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on February 13, 2017, and she received it 
on February 27, 2017. She was given 30 days to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence.3 Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were four items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3.4 Exhibits 1 and 3 are admitted into evidence 
without objection. GE 2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s 
interview that took place during the February 2016 background investigation. The ROI is 
not authenticated, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department Counsel’s 
written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond 
to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of 
the authentication requirement. The record does not demonstrate that Applicant 
understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
demonstrate that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 2 is inadmissible, and I have not considered 
the information in the ROI.    
 
 
                                                          
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My decision and 
formal findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guideline F.  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated February 13, 2017, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated February 27, 2017. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 The first item in the FORM is the SOR and Applicant’s Answer. Because the SOR and the Answer are the 
pleadings in this case, they are not marked as Exhibits. Items 2 through 4 are marked as Exhibits 1 through 
3.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and married with an adult son and a minor daughter. 
Since November 2015 she has worked for a defense contractor. Applicant had two 
periods of unemployment, one from June 2015 to August 2015 (caused when she 
relocated to another state), and one from June 2006 to October 2013 (when she was a 
“stay at home mom”).6   
 
The SOR alleged 18 delinquent debts totaling approximately $40,099.7 Applicant 
admitted all allegations, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.p. Those debts that 
Applicant denies, however, are supported by the record.8 In sum, I find that all allegations 
of delinquent debts are supported by Applicant’s admissions or by record evidence.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.9 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”10 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.11 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.12 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.13 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.14 An 
                                                          
6 GE 1.  
 
7 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.s.  
 
8 GE 3, pp. 8, 16. Applicant has not submitted any evidence to support her denials.   
 
9 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
10 484 U.S. at 531 
 
11 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
4 
 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.15 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.16 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.17 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.18 
 
     Discussion 
  
  Under Guideline F for financial considerations,19 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.20 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
                                                          
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
19 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
20 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and,  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence supports the conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history.  AG ¶¶ 19(a), (b), and (c) apply. The next inquiry is whether any of the mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
 Since Applicant’s answer to the SOR was bare-bones, she has shed no light on 
the causes of her delinquent indebtedness. Nor did her Answer inform us about how she 
was addressing that indebtedness, if at all. Likewise, because Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM, the record is barren of any explanations for how she incurred the delinquent 
indebtedness and what efforts, if any, she has undertaken to address that indebtedness.  
 
 Applicant’s period of delinquent indebtedness continues to the present, and there 
are 18 delinquencies. The period of indebtedness was not so long ago, nor was it 
infrequent. Thus, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 I did consider the two periods of unemployment Applicant experienced, two to 
three months in 2015 and just over seven years, from 2006 to 2013. Applicant attributed 
the 2015 unemployment to having relocated to another state. Without more, I cannot 
conclude that this was a circumstance largely beyond her control. Similarly, the lengthy, 
seven-year period of unemployment she attributed to electing to be a stay-at-home-mom, 
hardly a circumstance largely beyond her control. Thus, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is nothing in the record to show that Applicant has received financial 
counseling or that she has made good-faith efforts to repay her overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve her debts. Thus, AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
 
6 
 
   The record raises doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.21 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant failed to meet her ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:                   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
21 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
 
