 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-01921  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file returns or pay his Federal and state income taxes, as 
required, for 2012 through 2014. He illegally used marijuana daily from February 1999 
through November 2014. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 23, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On September 13, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and Guideline H (Drug Involvement). (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted his Answer to the  SOR on October 4, 2016, and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 1.) On October 25, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant on October 25, 2016, and received by 
him on October 31, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant responded to the FORM with additional information 
on November 30, 2016. He did not file any objection to the FORM’s contents, and did 
not request additional time to provide further response beyond the 30-day period he 
was afforded. Department Counsel had no objection to the FORM response, which I 
marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on June 7, 2017. 
Items 1 through 4 and AE A are admitted in evidence. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of 
SEAD 4. I considered the 2006 adjudicative guidelines, as well as the SEAD 4 AG, in 
determining Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, but this decision is issued pursuant to the SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old, has never married, and has no children. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in May 2007. He has held his present position as a help desk 
employee with a defense contractor since December 2014; and is seeking a security 
clearance in connection with that position. He has never served in the military, worked 
as a Federal civilian employee, or held a security clearance. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with some explanations. 
(Item 1.) His admissions are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant admitted in his e-QIP and Answer that he failed to either file required 
Federal and state income tax returns or pay required Federal and state income taxes for 
tax years 2012 through 2014. He was uncertain of the exact amount of taxes owed, but 
estimated the three-year total of unpaid taxes to be $14,000. He claimed that he had 
problems assembling the documentation necessary for him to file the returns and pay 
those taxes. He also reported that he worked as a field technician for the company 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
owned by his father during all of 2012 and most of 2013, before accepting full-time 
employment setting up cell phone tower sites with another company in September 
2013. (Item 1; Item 2.)  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant said that he had retained a new tax professional to 
assist him in resolving his income tax filing and payment delinquencies. He submitted 
copies of two unsigned draft “IRS e-file Signature Authorization” forms for tax years 
2014 and 2015, but did not otherwise document any updated status or resolution 
concerning his Federal or state tax issues from 2012 through 2014. (Item 1.) In his 
FORM response, he submitted evidence that he made one $583 payment toward his 
2013 state income tax debt, but no information concerning the remaining balances due 
toward either his state or Federal income tax debts for 2012 through 2014. He also 
submitted three pages of an IRS response to his October 12, 2016 request for taxpayer 
information related to his 2012 Federal income taxes. The response confirmed that he 
had not, as of that date, filed any return for tax year 2012 and that IRS records reflected 
no information about his income or taxes due for that year. (AE A.) Applicant provided 
no other information concerning the status of his unfiled returns or delinquent tax debts 
for 2012 through 2014.  
 
 Applicant reported on his e-QIP that he had illegally used “THC (Such as 
marijuana, weed, pot, hashish, etc.)” from February 2009 through November 2014. He 
reported the nature and frequency of his use as, “Daily use as a sleep aid.” He said that 
he did not intend to use this drug in the future, explaining, “Quit prior to starting my new 
job and intend on not using in the future in order to keep my job and hopefully my 
clearance.” He also admitted that he was arrested for possession and distribution of 
marijuana in a state police sting operation during April 2009. Applicant felt that he was 
entrapped because the police agents repeatedly asked him to give them some of his 
marijuana, then insisted on paying him for it despite his telling them that he was not a 
drug dealer. The state’s attorney subsequently declined to prosecute those charges on 
May 29, 2009. (Item 1; Item 2 at 37-38; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling, chemical dependency 
assessment, or treatment for drug abuse. He provided no budget information from 
which to predict his future solvency, or his ability to make any payments toward his 
delinquent tax debts. He submitted no evidence corroborating his claim that he last 
abused marijuana in November 2014, prior to starting his current job, and intended not 
to use it in the future. He offered no evidence to support findings concerning the level of 
responsibility his duties entail in his defense contractor work, or his track record with 
respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures there. I 
was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he 
elected to have his case decided without a hearing. (Item 1; AE A.) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant incurred what he estimated to be $14,000 in delinquent Federal and 
state income tax debts for tax years 2012 through 2014, and failed to file required 
Federal and state income tax returns for those years. He documented neither the ability 
nor any effective efforts to satisfy these debts or filing requirements, except for one 
payment of $583 toward his 2013 state tax debt that he made the day after he received 
the FORM. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted delinquent income tax issues: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s multiple delinquent income tax debts are substantial and ongoing. His 
failure to address these debts in a meaningful way over the past five years creates 
ongoing concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no 
reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not continue or recur. Mitigation 
was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant neither documented a reasonable basis to claim that his income tax 
issues arose from circumstances beyond his control, nor showed that he acted 
responsibly under such circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He 
offered no evidence of financial counseling or budget information establishing solvency 
going forward or ability to repay his delinquencies. He provided insufficient evidence 
that these problems are being resolved, are under control, or that a good-faith effort 
toward resolution has been initiated. His single payment toward an unidentified balance 
due on his delinquent state tax debt was not made until the day after he received the 
FORM, and it represented less than 5% of his total estimated unpaid taxes for 2012 
through 2014. Neither arrangements with Federal or state tax authorities to file the tax 
returns or pay the amounts owed, nor compliance with such arrangements was 
demonstrated. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security 
concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), or 20(g). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
 The security concerns under the guideline for drug involvement and substance 
misuse are set out in AG ¶ 24: 
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession or a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant admitted that he regularly misused marijuana, which he illegally 
possessed, from February 1999 until November 2014 on a daily basis. He also admitted 
that he illegally possessed and distributed marijuana during April 2009, despite the 
state’s attorney’s decision not to prosecute him for those offenses. The evidence 
supports security concerns under both of these disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG & 26 provides two conditions that could possibly mitigate the drug-related 
security concerns raised in this case based on Applicant’s explanations: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant admittedly abused marijuana for more than 15 years on a daily basis, 
and claimed, without corroboration, that he has not used it since the month before he 
began his current employment in late 2014. This established a pattern of recent and 
frequent drug abuse that did not occur under such circumstances that recurrence 
seems unlikely. Insufficient evidence was submitted to diminish the resulting doubts 
concerning his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Mitigation under 
AG & 26(a) was not established. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his illegal use, possession, and distribution of 
marijuana, but failed to provide evidence of actions to overcome these problems, or 
establish a pattern of abstinence. The claim in his January 2015 e-QIP, that his last 
illegal use or possession of marijuana was two months earlier in November 2014, was 
restated during his April 2016 security interview (Item 3), but was neither repeated nor 
corroborated by any evidence in his Answer or FORM response. He accordingly failed 
to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Other potential mitigating conditions are 
inapplicable in the absence of prescription drug abuse or drug treatment.      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
9 
 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $13,000 in 
delinquent Federal and state tax debts, according to his estimates, and provided no 
evidence that he filed any of his required income tax returns for 2012 through 2014. He 
abused marijuana on a daily basis for more than 15 years, until at least November 
2014, and provided insufficient evidence to demonstrate rehabilitation or other 
permanent behavioral changes. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress 
related to all of these issues remains undiminished, and recurrence was not shown to 
be unlikely.  
 
 Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for financial 
considerations, and for drug involvement and substance misuse. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
