 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ADP Case No. 16-03323 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised by Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On May 11, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On December 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, which became 
effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a public 
trust position for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a public trust position should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. 
 
 
2 
                                         
 
On January 30, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a decision 
without a hearing. (Item 1) On February 14, 2016, Department Counsel completed the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM). On February 27, 2016, Applicant received the FORM. 
She submitted information within the 30 days after receiving the FORM.1 On October 1, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. The case file consists of eight exhibits that were 
received into evidence. (Items 1-8)  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the 
September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 
2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s public trust position eligibility under the 
new AGs.2 My decision would have been the same under the prior AGs. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 The SOR alleged six debts under financial considerations. Applicant admitted SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, with explanation, and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f with explanation. 
Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old claims advocate employed by a defense contractor since 
1996. She seeks a public trust position in conjunction with her current employment. 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1985, and attended two different colleges from 
1993 to 1995. She has never married and has no dependents. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR consists of six debts: 1.a – a student loan placed in collections in the 
amount of $21,071; 1.b - a student loan placed in collections in the amount of $12,397 
(1.a and 1.b are from the same creditor); 1.c – a collection account in the amount of $368; 
1.d – a medical collection account in the amount of $273; 1.e – a medical collection 
account in the amount of $35; and 1.f – a medical collection account in the amount of $35 
(1.e and 1.f are from the same creditor). These allegations are established through the 
Government exhibits. (Items 2 - 8) 
 
Department Counsel’s FORM focused on the lack of documentation in Applicant’s 
SOR answer in response to her claims that her debts had been paid or otherwise 
                                            
1 Applicant’s FORM response was marked as Item 9, and was received into evidence. 
  
2 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf. 
 
3 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available in the 
cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
resolved, with the exception of SOR 1.d (medical collection account in the amount of 
$273). Applicant did provide documentation in her SOR answer that SOR 1.d had been 
paid. SOR 1.D RESOLVED. (Item 2) 
 
 In her FORM response, Applicant addressed the shortcomings noted by 
Department Counsel. Per agreement with the creditor, she consolidated her two student 
loans and is making $50 monthly payments. Applicant provided documentation of recent 
payments. This is in contrast to the past when payments were made involuntarily through 
garnishment or diversion of tax refunds. SOR 1. A AND 1.B BEING RESOLVED. (Items 
2 – 9) 
 
 Applicant stated the creditor in 1.c (collection account in the amount of $368) failed 
to correctly close out her account. She provided documentation that the account has been 
paid, settled for a lesser amount, and is closed.  SOR 1.C RESOLVED. (Items 2, 9) 
Applicant stated the creditor in 1.e and 1.f (medical collection accounts, both in the 
amounts of $35) sent these accounts to collections in error. She provided creditor 
documentation requesting removal of these accounts from the credit reporting agencies. 
SOR 1.F AND 1.E RESOLVED. (Items 2, 9) 
. 
 Applicant stated that despite “being out of work the majority of the past two years 
I have managed to keep my bills mostly on track.” She is proud of the customer service 
she has provided to military members and their families over the past 20 years. Applicant 
noted that she has “over hundred verbal and written kudos from individuals I have 
assisted over the years.” (Item 2) Her monthly budget reflects that she is living a modest 
lifestyle and living within her means. (Item 2) 
   
Policies 
 
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. The standard set out in the adjudicative guidelines assignment to sensitive 
duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.  
  
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
 
4 
                                         
 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
5 
                                         
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (f) are applicable in whole or in part to the debts 
contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. Applicant has paid, is paying, or otherwise resolved 
all of the debts alleged. Her being unemployed for two years no doubt impacted her ability 
to remain current on her debts. Having reviewed Applicant’s budget, it is apparent that 
she is doing her level best to remain financially afloat. Her long-term employment and 
dedication as a defense contractor are duly noted. In addition to evaluating the facts and 
applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
