 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-00896 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 25, 2016. 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 through 5 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny the SOR allegations, but rather provided comments 
next to each allegation. I will consider his comments as a denial to each allegation. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He was married from 1989 to 2011. He has two children 
from the marriage, ages 27 and 19 years old. He has been working for the same federal 
contractor since 1980.2  
 
 Credit reports from June 2016, July 2014, and Applicant’s statements substantiate 
the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to 
his 2011 divorce and the loss of his wife’s income.3 
 
In 2010, Applicant withdrew money from his 401k pension plan thereby creating a 
tax liability. He believed he and his wife would file their tax returns jointly. Due to the 
divorce, she filed separately. He was responsible for the taxes on the pension plan 
withdrawal. Applicant disclosed on his 2014 security clearance application (SCA) that he 
failed to pay his 2012 federal and state income taxes. He disclosed that he had been 
paying the state $50, but it was no longer taking this amount from him, and the debt 
remained delinquent.4  
 
In March 2015, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator as part of 
his background investigation. He explained that he believed he owed the state $8,000 in 
taxes and did not know how much he owed the IRS. He told the investigator that he 
contacted the IRS in the spring of 2014 and made a payment plan to resolve his 2012 tax 
debt. He explained that refunds owed to him for subsequent tax years were withheld and 
applied to his delinquent tax balance. He did not indicate he was participating in a 
payment plan, but rather he intended future refunds to be applied to satisfy his tax debt. 
                                                          
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
  
4 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
 
He explained he did not have the resources to pay his delinquent federal or state tax 
debts.5  
 
Regarding the judgment entered by the state in 2014 for $7,419 (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
against Applicant, he told the investigator that he had been making payments of $153 to 
the state since spring of 2014. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he was 
paying the IRS $45 and the state $153. He told the investigator that he believed he still 
owed the IRS $3,000. Applicant did not provide substantiating documents to verify he has 
a payment agreement with the IRS or the state. He did not provide supporting documents 
to show he has made payments towards his federal tax debt or the judgment entered by 
the state.6  
 
The SOR alleges 19 delinquent medical debts totaling approximately $6,898 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.c through 1.g and 1.i through 1.v). Applicant explained that several of these are debts 
for his children. He was unaware that he ex-wife was not paying the copays or other 
expenses. Applicant stated in his SOR answer that he consolidated some of these debts 
and has been paying $120 a month toward the consolidated debt. He also stated that he 
was in the process of negotiating payment plans for the remaining medical debts.7 No 
documents were provided to substantiate Applicant’s payments or actions.  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h (balance $87,944, past due $25,144) is a past-due 
mortgage. Applicant attributed this debt to his 2011 divorce. He stated that he could no 
longer afford to pay the mortgage based on his sole income. He has not made a mortgage 
payment since November 2013. In March 2014, he was working with the lender to short 
sale the house. In his SOR answer, he stated that the bank has approved for the house 
to be listed with realtors and for a short sale. On his July 2014 SCA, Applicant listed this 
house as his current residence.8 No other information was provided such as the current 
status of Applicant’s finances. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
5 Items 1, 3.  
 
6 Items 1, 3.  
 
7 Items 1, 3. 
 
8 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.9 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following four 
are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant failed to timely pay his 2012 state and federal income taxes. A judgment 
was filed against him by the state in 2014 for unpaid taxes. He has 19 delinquent medical 
debts and a past-due mortgage that are unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
  
 Applicant owes a judgment, medical debts, and a past-due mortgage. He indicated 
he is resolving his mortgage debt, making payments on his Federal and state tax debt, 
and had consolidated some medical bills and was making monthly payments. He failed 
to provide evidence to document his actions. He also indicated he was negotiating 
payments with the remaining medical creditors, but provided no documentary evidence. 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and recent. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a 2011 divorce and the loss of his 
wife’s income. This was beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. It has been six years 
since his divorce. He has not made a mortgage payment since November 2013, and 
based on his SCA information, he continues to live in the house. His federal tax debt was 
incurred in 2010. He indicated that the IRS was withholding yearly refunds he was entitled. 
In his answer he stated he was paying $45 to the IRS and $153 to his state, but did not 
provide evidence that he has an installment agreement, date it started, and whether he 
has made consistent payments. He failed to provide documented evidence of his actions. 
He also indicated he was making payments for certain medical debts, but did not provide 
proof of his actions or when they began. The evidence is insufficient to conclude he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence that his financial problems are under control. Applicant did not 
provide substantiating documentary evidence to conclude that he initiated and is adhering 
to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old with two grown children. He has been divorced since 
2011. He has worked for his employer since 1980. He has numerous delinquent debts, 
including a 2014 judgment for unpaid state taxes. He failed to pay his 2012 federal taxes. 
His mortgage is past-due, and he has medical debts that are delinquent. Applicant did not 
provide documentary evidence of his actions to resolve his financial problems or sufficient 
evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with sufficient questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v  Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
