 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-00539  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred some delinquent medical debts and defaulted on a home 
equity loan after experiencing unexpected medical issues. Most of those debts have 
been or are close to being resolved, and his financial situation is stable. Resulting 
security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
national security eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 17, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2016. He admitted all of the SOR 
allegations concerning delinquent debts, with explanations, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) 
On August 9, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 10, 2016, and received by him on August 17, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in writing, with additional evidence, on August 
31, 2016. He did not object to Items 1 through 5, which are admitted into evidence. 
Applicant’s FORM response, to which Department Counsel had no objection, is marked 
Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 22, 
2017.  
 
The SOR and FORM in this case were issued under the adjudicative guidelines 
that came into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent 
Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered 
the previous eligibility guidelines, as well as the new SEAD 4 AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the currently effective SEAD 4 
AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is married, and has two children. He graduated from 
high school in 1989, and worked as a Federal employee from 1989 to 1996. He has 
worked for two defense contractors in his current position as a ground support 
equipment mechanic since February 1996, and seeks national security eligibility in 
connection with that employment. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant admitted that, as recently as October 2015, he had seven delinquent 
debts totaling $48,323. One of these debts was a $47,071 balance due on a charged-off 
home equity line of credit (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant had been making payments to this 
creditor from August 2014 to April 2015 before the SOR was issued, reducing the 
original June 2014 charged-off balance of $48,231. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 5; AE A.) 
During June 2016, Applicant and this creditor entered a formal repayment agreement 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
requiring him to make a $200 down payment at the end of that month, followed by 
monthly payments of $150. Applicant documented that he made all required payments 
until the record closed. Further interest and late fees were not to be assessed under this 
repayment agreement, and all future monthly payments are to be applied to the 
remaining balance due. (Item 1; AE A.)  
 
 The remaining six formerly delinquent debts involved medical bills ranging from 
$20 to $505, and totaled $1,252 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.g). As of the close of the record, 
he had fully repaid all of those debts, except for the $505 (originally $580) account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He has been making payments toward this debt, and had reduced 
the outstanding balance due to $443 by June 29, 2016. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was temporarily unable or unwilling to repay his formerly delinquent 
medical and home equity loan debts, creating a history of not meeting financial 
obligations. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial issues were not attributed to any single cause, but with the 
exception of the home equity line of credit debt were relatively small medical bills. He 
has steadily maintained his current employment, and has fully repaid all but one of his 
formerly delinquent medical debts. He initiated good-faith repayment arrangements 
before his SOR was issued to address the largest medical and the home equity loan 
debts, and has been adhering to them to steadily reduce his outstanding balances. The 
home equity loan no longer appears as a delinquency on his most recent record credit 
report (Item 4).    
 
Applicant has successfully addressed his former delinquencies, and 
demonstrated clear indications that his financial issues are unlikely to recur. The record 
establishes full mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the relatively minor financial issues 
he encountered over the past several years. The likelihood that financial problems will 
recur is small. The potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is minimized by the 
resolution of all of Applicant’s formerly outstanding debts through repayment or ongoing 
agreed repayment plans. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He fully met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
