 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-00063  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant owes more than $16,000 in delinquent debt, was debarred from 
government employment for seven years, and falsified his security clearance 
application. He offered no evidence of efforts or means to resolve his debts, or 
establishing rehabilitation. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon 
a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 22, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On June 10, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 21, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
July 15, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 18, 2016, and received by him on August 2, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not 
file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond 
the 30-day period he was afforded. Items 1 through 4 are admitted in evidence. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of 
SEAD 4. I considered the 2006 adjudicative guidelines, as well as the SEAD 4 AG, in 
determining Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, but this decision is issued pursuant to the SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 59 years old and married. He earned an associate’s degree in 1986, 
and a bachelor’s degree in 2012. He has held his present employment as an 
engineering technician with a defense contractor since June 2015; and is seeking a 
security clearance in connection with that position. He was honorably discharged after 
serving in the Marine Corps from 1976 to 1984, and held a security clearance during 
that enlistment. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR without further explanation. A 
$13,063 tax lien (not further identified in the record evidence) was entered against him 
in a state court in October 2005. This lien has not been released, and the underlying tax 
debt remains unpaid. (Item 2; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant also has an unpaid $105 telephone debt and seven unpaid medical 
debts, which range from $14 to $1,687 and total $2,846. These eight debts were placed 
for collection in 2012 or 2013.2 Four of the medical debts involve $90 or less. (Item 2; 
Item 4.)  
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
2 The medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($90) and 1.i ($14) do not appear on the record credit report 
(Item 4), but were admitted by Applicant. The date they were placed for collection is uncertain. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant reported on his e-QIP that he worked for another defense contractor 
from November 2005 to April 2007, when he was fired for changing the test results on 
equipment he was testing. As a result of this conduct, and as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a, the 
Department of the Navy debarred him from government employment for seven years in 
May 2007. (Item 2; Item 3 at 14-15, 47.) 
 
 Applicant answered, “No,” in response to all questions about his financial record 
in Section 26 of his August 2015 e-QIP. SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c alleged that these answers 
were false, and Applicant admitted that he deliberately failed to report the adverse 
financial information set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i. SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that his 
falsification in the subsection, “Delinquency Involving Enforcement,” related to his denial 
that he had a lien placed against him for failure to pay taxes or other debts, “In the past 
seven (7) years.” (Emphasis in original.) This allegation claims that the lien that was 
entered against him in October 2005 should have been disclosed in response to this 
question. However, that lien was placed against him more than nine years before the 
date he signed and certified his e-QIP. Accordingly, the evidence does not support the 
allegation that this answer was false. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling. He provided no budget 
information from which to predict his future solvency, or his ability to make any 
payments toward his delinquent debts. He offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning the level of responsibility his duties entail in his defense contractor work, or 
his track record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of 
security procedures there. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:3  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has incurred more than $16,000 in delinquent debts since 2005. He 
documented neither the ability nor any efforts to satisfy these debts, five of which 
involved $105 or less including one for only $14. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s multiple delinquent debts are substantial and ongoing. His failure to 
address any of these debts in a meaningful way over the past twelve years creates 
ongoing concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no 
reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not continue or recur. Mitigation 
was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
                                                 
3 The record contains insufficient evidence to support security concerns under AG ¶ 19(f), concerning 
failure to file returns or pay Federal, state, or local income taxes as required. SOR ¶ 1.a does not allege, 
and the record does not otherwise identify, the source or type of tax lien as reported in Item 4. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant neither claimed that his debts arose from circumstances beyond his 
control, nor showed that he acted responsibly under such circumstances, as required 
for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He offered no evidence of financial counseling or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward or ability to repay his 
delinquencies. He failed to demonstrate that theses problems are being resolved, are 
under control, or that a good-faith effort toward resolution has actually been initiated. 
Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under 
the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or government protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
Applicant is an educated and experienced individual who has previously applied 
for and been granted a security clearance. He admitted his deliberate omission, 
concealment, and falsification of relevant facts concerning his delinquent debts on his 
2015 e-QIP. The evidence establishes significant security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a). 
As noted above, his denial concerning tax liens placed against him during the preceding 
seven years was not false.  
 
Applicant admitted that was fired and debarred from employment in Government 
work for seven years as a result of his falsification of equipment test results while 
working under a Navy contract. This evidence establishes substantial security concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 16(d)(1) through 16(d)(4).  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that would support mitigation under any of the 
foregoing conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $16,000 in 
delinquent debts including an unresolved 2005 tax lien. He falsified his e-QIP 
concerning his financial problems, and was fired and debarred for seven years after 
falsifying equipment tests results while working under a Government contract in 2007. 
The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the 
evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guidelines for financial considerations and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
