 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-01734 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. He has worked as a translator for the U.S. military for over 10 years and has 
repeatedly placed his personal safety at risk in support of the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. 
U.S. military officers who have worked with Applicant vouch for his reliability, honesty, 
conscientiousness in handling and safeguarding sensitive U.S. information, and loyalty to 
the United States. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to his relatives in Afghanistan, 
including the financial support he provides them, raise a security concern under the 
foreign influence guideline. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the 
administrative (written) record. 
 
 On October 24, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant six exhibits (Items 1 – 6) that the Government offers for 
admission into the record. Applicant submitted a response to the FORM on November 
13, 2016. With his Response, Applicant submitted documents related to his former 
 
2 
 
marriage and reference letters from U.S. military officers who have served with him in 
Afghanistan (Exhibits A – E).  
 
 On October 1, 2017, after the Hearing Office received confirmation that Applicant 
remained sponsored for a clearance, I was assigned the case. Without objection, the 
above-referenced exhibits offered by the parties are admitted into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. After graduating from high school in 2007, 
Applicant was hired by a U.S. Government (USG) contractor as a translator. He then 
served as a translator for U.S. military units operating in Afghanistan for the next three 
years. He immigrated to the United States in approximately September 2010, and 
subsequently became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has worked for USG contractors both 
in the United States and in Afghanistan, directly supporting the U.S. mission in 
Afghanistan for the past decade. He surrendered his Afghan passport to his facility 
security officer in 2015.1  
 
Applicant’s parents and his younger siblings remain in Afghanistan. Applicant is 
working on helping them immigrate to the United States. His older brother was also hired 
by a USG contractor to work as a translator for the U.S. military, and also immigrated to 
the United States. Before his recent assignment to Afghanistan, Applicant lived with his 
brother, who continues to work as a USG contractor, and his brother’s wife in the United 
States. Applicant and his older brother financially support their parents and younger 
siblings. Applicant estimates that since 2011, he has given his family about $300 to $500 
a month. As of April 2015, his financial support to his family in Afghanistan totaled about 
$19,000. Applicant’s parents are retired and his younger siblings are students. None of 
his family members have any connection to the Afghan government or any hostile group 
operating within Afghanistan. He reports that his tribe supports the U.S. military’s effort in 
Afghanistan.2 
 
Applicant has been vetted by the U.S. military in connection with his current and 
past USG contract jobs. He had interviews with U.S. military counterintelligence 
investigators in 2012, 2014, and 2015. He also was vetted by U.S. immigration authorities 
in 2014 in connection with his U.S. citizenship application. He disclosed his foreign 
connections and contacts, including his foreign family members, during these past 
investigations. He discussed his foreign connections and other aspects of his background 
with a security clearance investigator in 2015.3 
 
As of November 2016, Applicant had been working as a translator in Afghanistan 
for 18 months. His duties included translating high-level discussions between U.S. military 
officers and their Afghan partners. He has also been entrusted with translating sensitive 
                                                          
1 Items 2 – 5. 
 
2 Items 2, 4, 5; Response. 
 
3 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
documents. Applicant is well-respected for his abilities, reliability, and honesty. He is 
sought after by U.S. military units for his skill and reliability. He is thought of as a critical 
team member by the U.S. military officers who have worked with him. His job description 
was recently changed and he now requires a security clearance to continue working as a 
translator for U.S. and coalition forces.4 
 
One of his former U.S. military supervisors, an 0-5, writes that he never questioned 
Applicant’s loyalty and reliability. He would routinely discuss sensitive U.S. military 
operations and information in Applicant’s presence without concern.5 An 0-6, who is the 
former Director of Logistics for U.S. operations, writes that she never had concerns about 
assigning Applicant to translate high-level meetings because he is a skilled interpreter 
and is conscientious in the manner he handles the sensitive information he learned at 
these meetings.6 Another U.S. military officer writes, in pertinent part, that : 
 
Regardless of what has been asked of [Applicant] over the last decade, [he] 
has been ready, willing, and able to support the U.S. military personnel with 
his linguistic skills, experience, and knowledge. He has been a loyal, 
generous, competent, honest, and a hardworking member for each and 
every team he works. He has put his own safety, as well as the safety of his 
family at risk, and stepped forward to support his team members whenever 
they asked for his assistance. He has convoyed all over dangerous 
territories, flown in and out of hot zones, worked arduous hours, walked and 
traveled wearing full battle rattle, and traveled all over the world to 
accomplish the mission. He has been side-by-side with American service 
members on combat missions and has sacrificed everything he had known 
to become an American citizen. His integrity, his perseverance, and his 
record demonstrate his exemplary character. [Applicant] has manifested his 
dedication to American values, beliefs, culture, and mission goals in the 
nine years of excellent service and support he has provided.7 
 
Administrative Notice - Afghanistan.8 
 
Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic with a directly elected president, a bicameral 
legislative branch, and a judicial branch. The United States military has been engaged in 
Afghanistan since 2001. The State Department reports that, between 2001 and 2016, 
over 2,200 U.S. military members have died in Afghanistan. Additionally, over 20,000 
U.S. service members have been wounded in action.  
                                                          
4 Response; Exhibits A – E. 
 
5 Exhibit D. 
 
6 Exhibit C. 
 
7 Exhibit B at 2. 
 
8 See generally Item 6; as updated by current information contained in Appellate Exhibit I (publically-
available U.S. State Department documents). 
 
4 
 
In July 2012, Afghanistan was designated by the United States as a major non-
NATO ally. Notwithstanding the efforts of the U.S. and its coalition partners, Afghanistan 
continues to face daunting challenges. Taliban, terrorists, and other hostile forces remain 
active throughout Afghanistan and pose a serious threat. The State Department warns 
U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats 
against U.S. citizens. The State Department also reports the commission of human rights 
violations in Afghanistan, including the widespread disregard for the rule of law and official 
impunity for those who committed human rights abuses. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
 
5 
 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.9 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. (AG ¶ 6.) 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.10  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
                                                          
9 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
10 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle, in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”11 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.12 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country where 
elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate, such an applicant faces a 
very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their connections to and 
contacts with foreign relatives.13 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
7 
 
 Here, Applicant’s relationship to his family members residing in Afghanistan is not 
casual and the risk posed by his connection to them is far from a mere hypothetical 
concern. The Taliban and other hostile forces have shown their conviction and, at times, 
ability to capture, torture, and kill Afghans who have been suspected of cooperating with 
USG forces. These groups have also shown a willingness to harm the family members of 
those who work for or cooperate with U.S. and coalition forces.  
 
 However, no one is more acutely aware of the dangers posed by his work than 
Applicant. For over 10 years now, Applicant has demonstrated his loyalty to the United 
States. He was hired by the USG right out of high school and from 2007-2010 was 
employed as a linguist by the U.S. military in Afghanistan. After immigrating to the United 
States and finding gainful employment in the states, Applicant volunteered to return to 
Afghanistan and once again face those risks – at times, side-by-side with U.S. military 
members in combat situations. He has demonstrated his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
conscientious in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. In light of the 
overwhelming record evidence, Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential 
conflict of interest in favor of U.S. national security interests. 
 
Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In a Guideline B case 
that assessment also involves an examination of the foreign country at issue, to include 
their present relationship with the United States and other relevant factors. After reviewing 
and weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I find that Applicant mitigated 
any security concerns raised by his foreign familial connections. All of the above listed 
mitigating conditions apply, in full or in part, and together with the favorable whole-person 
factors raised by the evidence,14 mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         For Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
14 See AG ¶ 2 (whole-person concept). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (relevant factors to consider in determining 
whether granting a person a clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of the United States). 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
