                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )   .                                                         
         -----------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  16-02948           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On November 1, 2016, Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
recently 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR (undated) and requested a hearing. The case
was assigned to me on March 2, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on April 25, 2017. The 
Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant relied on one witness
(herself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 4, 2017.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested permission to keep the record
open to permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with copies of payments to
her creditors. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days ro supplement
the record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond. Within the time
permitted Applicant provided excerpts of her collection accounts covered in the SOR, an
updated credit report reflecting her accounts in good standing, and a letter explaining her
financial status and her enjoyment of her work. Applicant’s submissions were admitted
without objection as exhibits A-D.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 13 delinquent debts
exceeding $14,000. Allegedly, these listed delinquent debts remain outstanding. In her
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the allegations She admitted the
allegations pertaining to SOR  ¶¶ 1.a and., 1.c-1.m, while denying SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.n.
She expressed some uncertainty about allegations covered by SOR  ¶¶ 1.d and  1.f.
   
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 29-year-old emerging communication technician for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 31) The allegations covered in the
SOR and admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material
findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant has never been married and has no children. She received a high school
diploma in May 2005 and reported no post-high school education credits. She reported no
military service. 
1   Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD 4), dated December
10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial or continued
eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were established to
supercede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures for
administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DoD 5220.6, subject to the
updated substantive changes in the guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were in
effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change the decision in this case.  
2
Applicant has worked for her current employer as a deck electrician, and more
recently as a emergency communication technician, since May 2012. GE 1; Tr.  30, 33)
Previously, she was employed as a cashier for a non-defense contractor (October 2010
through May 2012), in various labor capacities for another non-defense contractor
(August 2009-October 2010), and as a part-time concierge (May 2010-October 2010).
(GE.s 1, 4; Tr.  29-30) 
Applicant’s finances
Between 2012 and 2016, Applicant accumulated 13 delinquent debts (some
medical and others consumer-related) (GEs 2-5) She attributed her medical debts to a
lack of health insurance in 2012 and her consumer debts to insufficient income to cover
her bills. (Tr. 27, 32, 41-43) All of Applicant’s SOR-listed were incurred before she joined
her current employer in May 2010. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 32-34) 
Among Applicant’s post-hearing submissions are excerpts of her May 2017 credit
report covering collection debts that she disputes. (AE B; Tr. 34) Applicant is currently
trying to enlist creditors whose bills she disputes to send her bills for her review. (Tr. 35)
To date, she has not been successful in enlisting responses. (AEs A-B)
Applicant claimed to have satisfied several of the listed debts in the SOR: SOR
debts ¶¶ 1.a ($6,471), 1.g ($500), 1.h ($431), and 1.l-1.m (both $25 debts). (AE B) She
provided no documentation, however, to support her claims, and based on her recent
credit reports, these debts remain outstanding.
SOR debts disputed by Applicant include a $2,043 debt covered by SOR ¶ 1.b.
(AE C) Applicant urges that this debt was non-suited in November 2015 and is no longer
an enforceable debt. While it is unclear whether Applicant conveyed any consideration to
creditor 1.b to induce the creditor to take a non-suit in its civil action against Applicant, the
debt was apparently resolved amicably between the parties and is no longer an
enforceable debt.
Applicant disputed other debts she does not recognize. She disputed SOR debts
¶¶ 1.h ($431) and 1.n ($641) for cited reasons she has never received bills from these
creditors. (AE B)
To date, Applicant has provided no payment documentation for those creditors
Applicant claims to have paid. Further, she furnished no documentation or other probative
corroborating evidence of any concerted efforts to resolve the debts she claims to have
either addressed or intends to address. (AEs A-B) To her credit, Applicant is keeping
other reported accounts in current status. (AEs A and D) None of these current accounts
are included in the SOR. She assured in her post-hearing statement that she loves her
job with the company she has worked for close to five years. (AE A) To this end, she
assured she is “trying to get everything paid off.” (AE A) Applicant’s intentions appear to
be sincere and are accepted. However, she has not provided sufficient documented
evidence of concrete steps she has taken to advance her stated objectives. Nor has
3
Applicant provided a budget, evidence of financial counseling, or character references of 
friends and colleagues who know her well from either working arrangements or contacts
outside the workplace.  
    P   o  l i c  i e  s     
           The SEAD 4, App. A lists new AGs to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise
a security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on
the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ (2)(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in SEAD 4, App.
A, ¶ 2(a) of the AGs. These AGs are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk.  See  SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d) The following AG ¶ 2(d) factors
are pertinent: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5)
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure to live within one’s means satisfy debts and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified and sensitive information . . . An individual who is
4
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds  .  .  .   AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the guidelines, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent medical
and consumer debts over a period of years. Applicant’s delinquent medical and
consumer debts warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” DC ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”  Applicant’s reported debts exceed $14,000 and have not been
paid or otherwise resolved, except for SOR debt  ¶ 1.b, which was the subject of a
court-ordered non-suit of the creditor’s civil complaint. (AE C) 
5
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also implicit  in
financial cases.
While extenuating circumstances account for many of Applicant’s difficulties in
paying certain medical and personal debts covered by the SOR, they do not adequately
explain her failures to address her debts once she became fully employed with her
current employer in 2012. Taking into account all of the circumstances associated with
her accumulated delinquent debts, Applicant’s circumstances merit only partial 
application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under
the circumstances.”
Applicant has since documented her favorable resolution of her SOR ¶ 1.b debt,
but has failed to provide any corroborating evidence of payment or successful 
resolution of her remaining listed debts. Based on the documented information available
in the record, none of the other mitigating conditions are available to Applicant. 
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s inability to demonstrate more
progress in addressing her delinquent debts preclude her from establishing a
meaningful track record for meeting her medical and consumer debt obligations. See
ISCR case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s accumulated
medical and consumer debt delinquencies and her inability to do more with paying or
otherwise successfully resolving her are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements
imposed by the guideline governing financial considerations. Unfavorable conclusions
are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c-1.n
of Guideline F. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegation
covered by subparagraph 1.b of the SOR. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a and 1.c-1.n:                           Against Applicant 
6
Subpara. 1.b:                                                For Applicant
Conclusio  n  s                            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
