 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00681 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for access to classified information. She did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the disputes she asserts for two delinquent credit card 
accounts for a total of about $18,000. Nor did she provide evidence of actions taken to 
resolve the two accounts. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on May 5, 2015. This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on September 6, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2016. She requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Her response consisted of a two-page 
memorandum without attachments or enclosures.     
 
On December 8, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it December 13, 2016. She did not reply 
within 30 days from receipt of the information as required. The case was assigned to me 
October 1, 2017.     
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 10, which is a report of 
investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the 
November 2015 background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, 
as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.1 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 
10865 prohibits receipt and consideration of “investigative reports” without 
authenticating witnesses. The Directive provides no exception to the authentication 
requirement. Indeed, the authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule 
that prohibits consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
ROI was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a “waiver” of the 
authentication requirement. In my view, Department Counsel is conflating or confusing 
the terms waiver and forfeiture.2 In the law of evidence, errors are preserved by timely 
objections, and relief on appeal is granted from a preserved error unless it is harmless 
(the harmless-error doctrine). Waiver is the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment of 
a legal right or advantage. When there is a waiver there is no error to correct on appeal 
and no relief to grant. On the other hand, failure to make a timely objection usually 
forfeits any error, and relief on appeal is appropriate from a forfeited error only upon a 
showing that the error was plain, obvious, and prejudicial (the plain-error doctrine).   
 
Here, the written record does not demonstrate that Applicant, who has not replied 
to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It 
also does not demonstrate that she understood the implications of waiving an objection. 
Accordingly, given the lack of an authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI 
in reaching my decision.  
 
                                                          
1 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
2 See United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725 (1993) (in this opinion, the Supreme Court distinguishes 
between forfeiture and waiver).  
 
 
3 
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee who requires a top-secret security clearance 
for her employment as an assistant facility security officer for a federal contractor. She 
married in 1983, and she and her husband have two adult children.  
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of (1) a 
charged-off credit card account for $17,763 and (2) a $334 collection account stemming 
from a credit card account. The two delinquent accounts are established by credit 
reports from July 2009, May 2015, January 2016, and June 2016.3 There is no 
documentation in the written record to establish that the delinquent accounts were paid, 
settled, in a payment arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved.  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the charged-off credit card account, 
asserting that it was not a debt she incurred. She explained at some length her belief 
that the debt was due to fraud, but she did not provide any documented proof to support 
the basis of her dispute. As noted by Department Counsel in her brief, the July 2009 
credit report in the written record shows that the credit card account, which is an 
individual account, was opened in May 2008, was current and in good standing until at 
least June 2009, and had a credit limit of $19,000, a balance of $18,799, and $0 past 
due.4  
 
The May 2015 credit report shows the credit card account was in collection and 
had been closed by the credit grantor.5 The date of last activity is May 2010. It has a 
balance of $17,763 and a past-due amount of $16,160. 
 
The credit reports from January and June 2016 provide similar information about 
the credit card account.6 Both reports show the debt as a charged-off account in the 
amount of $17,763. And the June 2016 report notes the date of first delinquency was 
November 2009, which is more than a year after it was opened in May 2008.7 
 
Applicant denied in part and admitted in part the $334 collection account. She did 
not provide documented proof to support the basis of her dispute. Nor did she provide 
documentation of actions taken to resolve the debt.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Exhibits 6, 7, 8, and 9.  
 
4 Exhibit 9 at 4.  
 
5 Exhibit 8 at 4. 
 
6 Exhibits 6 at 3 and 7 at 2.  
 
7 Exhibit 6 at 3.  
 
 
4 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.8 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.9 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”10 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.11 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.12 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.13 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.14 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.15 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.16 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
                                                          
8 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
10 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
14 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
 
5 
 
facts that have been admitted or proven.17 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.18 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.19 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions taken to resolve the issue.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. That evidence consists 
of four credit reports from 2009-2016 that establish the two delinquent credit card 
accounts for a total of about $18,000 in her name. Neither debt is resolved.  
 
 Applicant has not met the requirements of the second prong of the mitigating 
condition found at AG ¶ 20(e). For both debts, she did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of her disputes. The lack of documentation is not much of a 
concern for the $334 collection account because it’s a minor amount. But that is not the 
                                                          
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
19 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
case with the charged-off account for more than $17,000. For that debt, her explanation 
in her answer to the SOR is suspect. If the charges on the credit card account were due 
to fraud, as she asserts, then it is unclear why payments were initially made on the 
account as reflected in the credit reports. In addition, she did not provide documentation 
of actions taken to address either debt.  
 
 Given that Applicant requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing, the lack of supporting documentation undermines her case. It’s the 
responsibility of the individual applicant to produce relevant documentation in support of 
their case. Here, Applicant has not met her burden of production because she did not 
produce any documentation to substantiate the basis of her disputes or of actions taken 
to resolve the two delinquent debts. Accordingly, based on the written record, I am 
unable to make an affirmative determination that Applicant is an acceptable security 
risk.20  
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In 
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the 
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also 
considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
20 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(a).   
 
