 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00887 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for access to classified information. She failed to present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from a history of financial 
problems or difficulties. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on September 30, 2015. This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. Thereafter, on October 11, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2016. She requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Her response consisted of a three-page 
memorandum and one enclosure.     
 
On December 13, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on December 19, 2016, who received it December 27, 2016. She did not reply 
within 30 days from receipt of the information as required. The case was assigned to me 
October 1, 2017.     
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 4, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the December 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, which is required 
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.1 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 
prohibits receipt and consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating 
witnesses. The Directive provides no exception to the authentication requirement. 
Indeed, the authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits 
consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a “waiver” of 
the authentication requirement. In my view, Department Counsel is conflating or 
confusing the terms waiver and forfeiture. In the law of evidence, errors are preserved 
by timely objections, and relief on appeal is granted from a preserved error unless it is 
harmless (the harmless-error doctrine). Waiver is the voluntary relinquishment or 
abandonment of a legal right or advantage. When there is a legitimate waiver there is 
no error to correct on appeal and no relief to grant. On the other hand, failure to make a 
timely objection usually forfeits any error, and relief on appeal is appropriate from a 
forfeited error only upon a showing that the error was plain, obvious, and prejudicial (the 
plain-error doctrine).   
 
Here, the written record does not demonstrate that Applicant, who has not replied 
to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It 
also does not demonstrate that she understood the implications of waiving an objection. 
Accordingly, given the lack of an authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI 
in reaching my decision.  
 
                                                          
1 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
 
3 
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for her 
employment as a federal contractor. She has worked as an executive administrative 
assistant since at least 2004. She had a full-time job from October 2004 to April 2008, 
when moved to another position. She had a full-time job from April 2008 to September 
2012, when she was laid off due to non-renewal of a contract. She was then 
unemployed for about two months. She resumed full-time employment in November 
2012, but was laid off in October 2013 due to non-renewal of a contract. She began her 
current full-time job in October 2013. She has never married and has no children.  
 
In her September 2015 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed four 
delinquent financial accounts. The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or 
difficulties consisting of 11 collection or charged-off accounts for a total of about 
$10,408. The accounts include two medical collection accounts for a total of $327, and 
the rest appear to be consumer accounts. All 11 delinquent accounts are established by 
credit reports from October 2015 and July 2016.2 There is no documentation in the 
written record to establish that the any of the 11 delinquent accounts were paid, settled, 
in a payment arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved.  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that her indebtedness was caused 
by the job loss and two-month period of unemployment in 2012 and subsequent 
underemployment. In particular, she stated that she went from earning about $70,000 
annually to earning about $40,000, a loss of about $30,000 in annual income. She also 
stated that she is working with a financial counselor, and provided a one-page client 
action plan, dated October 24, 2016, as an enclosure to her answer. That document 
reflects a gross annual income of about $39,000.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.3 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.4 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
                                                          
2 Exhibits 5, 6, and 7.  
 
3 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
 
4 
 
side of denials.”5 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.6 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.7 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.8 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.9 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.10 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.11 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.12 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.13 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.14 
                                                          
5 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
6 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
7 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
9 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
10 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
14 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. She is indebted on 11 
delinquent accounts for about $10,408, and none of delinquent debts are resolved. The 
failure to meaningfully address her delinquent accounts suggests she may be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.  
 
 What’s missing here is documentation in support of Applicant’s case. Although 
she met with a financial counselor in October 2016, shortly after the SOR was issued to 
her, there is no documentation from Applicant or her financial counselor to establish that 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
Likewise, there is no documentation to establish that she has initiated and is adhering to 
a good-faith effort to repay her delinquent accounts. Finally, although her financial 
problems are connected to her unemployment and underemployment, I cannot 
conclude that she has acted responsibly under the circumstances given the state of the 
written record. 
  
 Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In 
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the 
 
6 
 
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also 
considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
