 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01237 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on October 12, 2016, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on November 16, 2016. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 2, 2016. 
As of January 30, 2017, she had not responded. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in 
evidence.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She attended 
college for a period without earning a degree. The most recent information available 
indicates that she has never married, and she has a 14-year-old child.1 
  
 Applicant was charged with felony hit-and-run after a 2010 accident. She hired 
an attorney and pleaded guilty to reckless driving. She was ordered to pay about $1,500 
in restitution and a fine of about $700. She was unemployed from May 2012 through 
November 2013.2 
 
 The SOR alleges two unpaid judgments totaling $1,771 and 12 delinquent debts. 
However, SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f are duplicate accounts representing the same debt. The 
non-duplicate allegations include $20,586 due on the balance of an auto loan after 
repossession; three miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling $1,315; and seven unpaid 
parking citations totaling $1,135. Applicant denied owing most of the debts alleged in 
the SOR. The debts are all listed on at least one credit report.3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $161 debt to a telecommunications company. She 
wrote that she “will pay this off very soon.” She admitted living at the apartment complex 
that obtained a $1,318 judgment against her in April 2012. She did not believe that she 
owed anything when she moved out of the apartment. She stated during her 
background interview in January 2016 that she signed a written agreement to make 
$219 monthly payments, but she never followed up with payments.4 
 
 Applicant admitted having a car loan with the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. She 
listed the $11,486 defaulted car loan on her February 2015 Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86). She wrote that she set up a payment plan. She told the 
background investigator that she returned the car as a voluntary repossession after the 
car was in an accident. She stated that she then made $150 monthly payments until the 
amount owed was satisfied. She did not provide any documentation establishing 
payments. The March 2015 credit report lists the balance of the charged-off loan as 
$11,486. The March 2016 credit report lists the high credit as $11,486 and the balance 
as $20,586.5 
 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 5. 
 
2 Items 2, 5. The SOR did not allege Applicant’s conviction for reckless driving. Any matter that was not 
alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered for its effect on 
Applicant’s finances, when assessing her credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and during 
the whole-person analysis.  
 
3 Items 1-5. 
 
4 Items 1, 3-5. 
 
5 Items 1-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant told the background investigator that her ex-boyfriend received the 
seven parking tickets on her car without her knowledge. She stated that she was 
attempting to get the ex-boyfriend to pay the tickets. She stated that she would pay the 
tickets if he refused to pay them. She wrote in her response to the SOR that she is 
willing to pay the tickets if there is any problem when she goes to get service from the 
DMV.6 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. She did not 
provide any documentation when she responded to the SOR.7 Because she did not 
respond to the FORM, the current state of Applicant’s finances is unknown. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
6 Items 1, 5. 
 
7 Items 1, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f are duplicate accounts representing the same debt. When 
the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the 
 
5 
 
duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-
04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant was unemployed from May 2012 through November 2013. It is unclear 
how much the reckless driving conviction affected her finances. She denied owing most 
of the debts alleged in the SOR, but she did not provide any documented proof of 
payments or to substantiate the basis of a dispute to the legitimacy of any debts. Her 
seven unpaid parking citations are particularly concerning. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
