 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02970 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered 
this case under the previous AGs implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same 
using either set of AGs.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 14, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-7 (Item 1 includes pleadings and 
transmittal information, Item 8 is a request for administrative notice on Afghanistan). 
The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on December 10 2016. Applicant 
was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections, but submitted exhibits (AE A 
and B). Items 3-7 and AE A and B are admitted into evidence without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Afghanistan. Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the requested 
facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of Fact.2 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from U.S Government reports.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He was born in Afghanistan. He immigrated to the 
United States in 2000 and received permanent resident status in 2001. He became a 
U.S. citizen in 2005. He has a master’s degree. In 1990, he married his wife in 
Afghanistan. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen. They reside together at their home in the 
United States. He has three children who are U.S. citizens and residents. All three 
children reside with Applicant at his home. Applicant has worked for the U.S. military as 
a linguist from August 2012 to May 2014 (resigned position to come back to the U.S. to 
receive medical treatment); December 2007 to March 2011 (came back to U.S. because 
of injury suffered while deployed); and May 2006 to December 2007. He was deployed 
                                                          
2 Item 8. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
 
3 
 
 
to Afghanistan on all these occasions. He went through counterterrorism screenings in 
2006, 2007, 2008, 2012, 2014, and 2016.5 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s mother, five brothers (with one brother being a 
sub-governor of Afghanistan), two sisters, and his father-in-law (a retired Afghan police 
officer) and mother-in-law are all residents and citizens of Afghanistan. It further alleges 
Applicant sends approximately $300 monthly to his mother. 
  
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and/or citizens of 
Afghanistan:  
 
 1. His mother, who is 82 years old. She is a housewife. Applicant has monthly 
contact with his mother. He also sends her approximately $300 monthly to support her 
medical expenses. She is not aware of what he does for a living or where he works. She 
is not affiliated with the Afghan government. He has monthly contact with her.6  
 
 2. Applicant’s five brothers and two sisters. None of his brothers or sisters knows 
what he does for a living or where he works. None of his siblings have any Afghan 
government connections. His brother that was a sub-governor retired from that position. 
He has sporadic contact with these siblings. The contact ranges from monthly to once 
every two years.7 
 
 3. His father-in-law and mother-in-law. His father-in-law is retired from his police 
position. He is unaware of Applicant’s work. Applicant’s contact with him is limited to 
twice a month. His mother-in-law is a housewife. She is unaware of Applicant’s work. 
Applicant’s contact with her is twice a year. Neither have any current affiliations with the 
Afghan government.8    
 
 Applicant presented awards and training certificates he received while deployed 
as a linguist for U.S. forces in Afghanistan. His certificates include recognition for 
completing two linguist training courses and a pre-deployment training course. He was 
also recognized for providing “one year of dedicated service to the U.S. military in 
support of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF).” The commander of a combined joint 
task force (Major General) presented Applicant with a certificate of achievement 
specifically recognizing him for his professionalism and dedication to duty, which helped 
deter the re-emergence of terrorism in the region.9 
 
                                                          
5 Item 2, 3-5, 7. 
 
6 Items 3-5, 7; AE A. 
 
7 Items 3-5, 7; AE A. 
 
8 Items 3-5, 7; AEA. 
 
9 Items 5-1 through 5-24. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 A U.S. State Department travel warning remains in effect for Afghanistan. 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State of Iraq and 
Levant, and members of other armed opposition groups are active throughout the 
country. Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the 
Taliban and other terrorist groups. The border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan 
remains a safe haven for terrorists. The country’s most significant human-rights concern 
during 2015 was widespread violence, armed insurgent groups’ attacks on civilians, and 
killing of persons affiliated with the government.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
10 Item 8. 
 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” as 
follows:   
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The 
relationship of Afghanistan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not 
be placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Afghanistan who might be 
coerced by terrorists or other governmental entities.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”11 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, or his relatives living in Afghanistan, it is not possible to rule out such a future 
possibility. As demonstrated by his regular contacts with his family, he continues to feel 
an obligation to them and affection for them. Applicant’s concern for his relatives is a 
positive character trait that increases his trustworthiness; however, it also increases the 
concern about potential foreign influence. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his relatives 
who are living in Afghanistan. Applicant communicates with these relatives on a regular 
basis. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this 
presumption. Given Afghanistan’s fragile security situation, Applicant’s relationships 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
with his relatives living in that country are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s current linguistics position could cause him 
to be placed in a position to choose between the interests of his relatives and those of 
the United States. However, Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He moved to the United States in 
2000, gained citizenship in 2005, and currently resides in the United States with his 
family. Additionally, he volunteered to go into harm’s way to serve as a linguist for U.S. 
forces in Afghanistan on numerous occasions since 2006. He went through multiple 
counterintelligence screenings before these deployments. He was recognized for his 
outstanding contributions to the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. The evidence supports 
that Applicant has longstanding loyalties toward the United States and would resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance. I considered the ties he established in this country and 
his service as a linguist in a hostile environment, thereby demonstrating his 
longstanding loyalty to this country. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs   1.a: - 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
