 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03997 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant served honorably as a U.S. linguist in a dangerous environment for 
about five years, and he has made substantial contributions to the national security of 
the United States. Applicant has substantial connections to the United States. During 
his December 23, 2015 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject 
interview (PSI), he corrected the false information about his employment history in his 
November 24, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security 
clearance application (SCA). Foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns 
are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2015, Applicant completed and signed an SCA. (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On February 8, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on 
September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). The SOR set forth security concerns arising 
under the foreign influence and personal conduct guidelines. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On March 14, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
HE 3. On April 18, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 24, 2017, 
the case was assigned to me. On May 9, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for June 14, 2017. HE 
1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
three exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 19-25, 36-37; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-C. On June 22, 2017, 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous 
AGs. I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits and a summary for administrative notice 
concerning foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to 
Afghanistan. Tr. 20-21; HE 4; I-VI. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate 
type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 
802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings 
is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice). Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the 
proffered documents and obtaining information from the Department of State website. 
Tr. 20-21. I granted Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice. Tr. 20-21. 
 
The first three paragraphs and the last paragraph of the Afghanistan section are 
taken from U.S. State Department Background Notes, https://2001-2009.state.gov/p/ 
sca/ci/af/. The other paragraphs are quoted from Department Counsel’s administrative 
notice request (bullet symbols and internal footnotes are omitted).  
     
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf. 
    
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 2.a, and 2.b. HE 3. He 
also provided mitigating information. HE 3. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old linguist, and DOD contractors have employed him as a 
contractor in Afghanistan and as a cultural advisor at a military installation in the United 
States. Tr. 6; AE A. He was employed in Afghanistan until the SOR was issued. AE A at 
1.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. Tr. 25; GE 1. In 1987, Applicant graduated 
from high school in Afghanistan. Tr. 6. He received a bachelor’s degree from a military 
university in Afghanistan in 1991 or 1992. Tr. 6. He served in the Afghan military for 
several years up until around 1995, and when he left Afghan military service, he was a 
first lieutenant platoon leader. Tr. 7; GE 3. He returned to Afghan Army service from 
2001 to 2005. GE 3. When he left the Afghan Army the second time, he was a 
lieutenant colonel assigned as a tank-driver instructor. GE 1; GE 3.  
 
Applicant married in 1996, and his children are ages 7, 12, 10, and 20. Tr. 8. All 
of his children were born in Afghanistan except for the seven year old who was born in 
the United States. Tr. 8. In 2009, he received a U.S. visa because of support to the U.S. 
Government. GE 2. He immigrated to the United States in 2009, and he and his spouse 
were naturalized as U.S. citizens in 2014. Tr. 25; GE 2 at 11. All of his children live in 
the United States and are U.S. citizens. GE 1; GE 2.3  
 
Applicant took the Naturalization Oath of Allegiance to the United States in 2014. 
GE 2. The Naturalization Oath of Allegiance to the United States of America states: 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen; 
that I will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United 
States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will 
bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will bear arms on behalf 
of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform 
                                            
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 Applicant’s children were all under the age of 18, held green cards, and resided with Applicant 
and his spouse when Applicant and his spouse were naturalized as U.S. citizens. Their children meet the 
criteria for automatic U.S. citizenship. See U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services website, 
“Citizenship Through Parents,” https://www.uscis.gov/us-citizenship/citizenship-through-parents.  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
noncombatant service in the Armed Forces of the United States when 
required by the law; that I will perform work of national importance under 
civilian direction when required by the law; and that I take this obligation 
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me 
God.4 
  
Applicant’s mother, brother, and three sisters are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. Tr. 31, 34; SOR response; GE 2. His mother lives with Applicant’s brother 
in Afghanistan. Tr. 33. Applicant’s father has passed away. Tr. 33. Applicant plans to 
bring his mother to the United States. Tr. 14-15. Applicant applied to the U.S. 
Government to obtain a visa for her. Tr. 31; AE C. She is in the midst of the immigration 
process to obtain a green card. Tr. 15, 23. He provides financial support to his mother 
because she needs medical assistance. Tr. 15, 33. He provides about $250 monthly to 
his brother, and then his brother provides the funds to Applicant’s mother. Tr. 36, 44. In 
total, he has provided about $14,000 to $21,000 to his mother over the years. GE 3 at 9. 
Applicant previously contacted his brother several times a month; however, now he only 
contacts his brother about once a year. Tr. 36; GE 2. 
 
Applicant’s brother does not work for the Afghan government. Tr. 32. All of 
Applicant’s sisters are married, and he is not aware of his sisters’ husbands’ 
employment. Tr. 32. His contact with his sisters or their husbands is about once or twice 
a year. Tr. 33; GE 2. 
 
Applicant’s spouse has four brothers, two sisters, and mother, who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. Tr. 35; SOR response. Applicant or his spouse has 
weekly to monthly contact with her two sisters and one brother. GE 2. Applicant 
provides about $400 to $600 annually to her mother. Tr. 35; GE 2. None of Applicant’s 
in-laws work for the Afghan government. Tr. 35.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In Applicant’s November 24, 2015 SCA, he said he was employed from February 
2010 to August 2014 as an interpreter/cultural advisor at a military installation. GE 1. He 
said he left that employment because of “lack of work.” GE 1. He was also employed 
from October 2014 to March 2015 as a driver, and he said he left that employment due 
to “lack of work.” GE 1.  This SCA asks: 
 
For this employment have any of the following happened to you in the last 
seven (7) years?  
 
Fired 
Quit after being told you would be fired 
Left by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance 
                                            
4 The language of the current Oath of Allegiance is found in the Code of Federal Regulations 
Section 337.1 and is closely based upon the statutory elements in Section 337(a) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, 8 U.S.C. § 1448, https://www.uscis.gov/us-
citizenship/naturalization-test/naturalization-oath-allegiance-united-states-america. 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant responded no to these questions for both employments. 
 
A few months after arriving in the United States, Applicant obtained employment 
at an Army installation where he worked as a cultural advisor for about four years until 
August 2014. Tr. 15, 18, 26-27; GE 1. After two agents of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) interviewed him and gave him a polygraph test, someone in the 
Army barred him from the Army installation. Tr. 38, 42-43. He believed he passed the 
FBI polygraph test. SOR response. Applicant said he does not know why the FBI agents 
questioned him or why he was barred from the installation. Tr. 18, 28, 39-42. Applicant 
believes the loss of employment was not his fault. Tr. 15-16. He did not lose that 
employment because of a lack of work. Tr. 28. He characterized his company’s action 
as firing him for not having access to the installation. Tr. 18; SOR response.  
 
After Applicant was terminated from his employment on the military installation in 
August 2014, he obtained employment for a government contractor as a driver. Tr. 29. 
He lost his employment as a driver because of an argument he had with a manager. Tr. 
16. They argued over whether he was supposed to be paid $80 for a trip or $80 a day. 
Tr. 16. The manager used profanity and told Applicant he was fired. Tr. 16, 29. 
Applicant filed a lawsuit against his employer, and the employer paid Applicant $820 to 
settle the lawsuit. Tr. 16-17. Applicant did not leave that position because of “lack of 
work.” Tr. 29.  
 
Applicant explained why he did not disclose that he was fired as follows, “When 
you get another job, if you said you’re fired and nobody will give you other job.” Tr. 29.  
 
During Applicant’s December 23, 2015 OPM PSI, Applicant disclosed that he 
was fired from the employments ending in August 2014 and March 2015. GE 2. He said 
he did not provide accurate information about leaving the employments because “it is 
harder to find a job if you have been ‘fired’.” GE 2. Applicant also disclosed that he was 
fired from these two employments on his November 9, 2015 Counterintelligence-
Focused Security Screening Questionnaire. GE 3. The OPM investigator did not 
indicate in his or her summary of interview that Applicant was confronted with 
information about being fired from his employments before he admitted he was fired.      
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant was employed in Afghanistan by a contractor working for the U.S. Army 
from 2005 to 2009. Tr. 14, 25-26. Applicant was injured in Afghanistan. Tr. 24. He hurt 
his back, knee, and ankle when he lifted a duffel bag and slipped on a gravel helicopter 
pad. Tr. 24. A vehicle accident in April 2017 aggravated the injury to his back. AE B.   
 
 Applicant has been employed in Afghanistan from November 2016 to April 2017. 
AE A at 1. His current employer in Afghanistan described him as an effective interpreter. 
AE A at 1. He accepts extra assignments, has conducted hundreds of interviews, is 
professional, and acts as a mentor for new interpreters. AE A at 1. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant provided five letters of support from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
employees, a Navy petty officer second class, and other Army employees who served 
with Applicant in Afghanistan from 2005 through 2007. AE A at 3, 4, 9, 12, 13. The 
general sense of their letters is Applicant is dependable, trustworthy, diligent, and 
honest. AE A at 3, 4, 9, 12, 13. He received 11 certificates of appreciation for his 
excellent services (including service as a force protection guard), professionalism, and 
contributions to mission accomplishment in Afghanistan. AE A at 25-28, 44-48, 52, 62. 
 
Applicant provided letters of support from one colonel, three lieutenant colonels, 
one major, one captain, and one staff sergeant lauding his diligence, professionalism, 
and contributions to mission accomplishment during Applicant’s service in the United 
States and Afghanistan as a cultural advisor, interpreter, and role player. AE A at 5, 6, 
7, 8, 10, 11, 14. He received 57 certificates of appreciation for his outstanding work as a 
cultural advisor, interpreter, and role player in the United States. AE A at 16-24, 29-43, 
50-51, 53-61, 63-95.  
 
   On June 29, 2016, a U.S. Army colonel wrote Applicant has “immense 
character and integrity.”5  He is “tremendously hard-working and loyal,” and he achieves 
“phenomenal results.” “He proved instrumental in rebuilding . . . security forces from the 
worst to one of the most capable units within Afghanistan.” Applicant is trustworthy, and 
the colonel said he would be honored to serve with Applicant in the future. 
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia that is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country, 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically-elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election.  
 
A U.S. State Department Travel Warning remains in effect. The State 
Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan because of continued 
instability and threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel to all areas 
                                            
5 The source for the information in this paragraph is a statement from an Army colonel who 
indicated Applicant served as his personal linguist for eight months in the most volatile province in 
Afghanistan. AE A at 2. 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of Afghanistan remains unsafe due to the ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, 
military combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and 
tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and indirect fire, suicide bombings and insurgent 
attacks, including attacks using vehicle-borne or other improvised explosive devices 
(IEDs). Attacks may also target official Afghan and U.S. governmental convoys and 
compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas. 
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State of Iraq 
and the Levant - Khorasan Province (ISKP) and members of other armed opposition 
groups are active throughout the country. ISKP has shown its operational capability, 
having attacked both Afghan and foreign government facilities. The Taliban and its 
affiliates routinely attack Afghan, Coalition, and U.S. targets with little regard for civilian 
casualties.  
 
Due to security concerns, unofficial travel to Afghanistan by U.S. government 
employees and their family members is restricted and requires prior approval from the 
State Department.  
 
According to the State Department’s 2015 Country Reports on Terrorism, 
Afghanistan continued to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the 
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network and other insurgent and terrorist groups. The 
Haqqani Network continued to plan and conduct high profile attacks and assassinations 
against U.S., Coalition and Afghan interests, particularly in Kabul and other key 
government centers.  
 
According to the State Department, the border region of Afghanistan and 
Pakistan remains a safe haven for terrorists. It is an under-governed area that terrorists 
exploit to conduct attacks in both countries. Terrorist groups active in Afghanistan, such 
as al-Qa’ida (AQ), the Haqqani Network and others, operate in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan. ISIL-Khorasan (ISIL-K) is largely based in Afghanistan, but its support network 
also reaches into Pakistan's tribal areas along the border. The Afghan government has 
struggled to assert control over this remote terrain where the population is largely 
detached from national institutions.  
 
According to the U.S. Defense Department's June 2016 report on Afghanistan, 
although al-Qa’ida’s core leadership in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region has 
been degraded, elements continue to seek safe haven on both sides of the border to 
regenerate and conduct attack planning. The continued development of an al-Qa’ida 
affiliate in the region (al-Qa’ida in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS)), highlights the 
dynamic nature of the terrorist and militant landscape of the region, posing risks to the 
mission and to U.S. interests.  
 
The situation in Afghanistan remains precarious, and in July 2016, President 
Obama announced that he would keep 8,400 U.S. service members in Afghanistan 
through the end of his term in January 2017.  
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In its annual Human Rights Report for 2015, the U.S. Department of State 
reported that the most significant human rights problems in Afghanistan during the year 
were widespread violence, armed insurgent groups' attacks on civilians and killing of 
persons affiliated with government, torture and abuse of detainees by government 
forces; widespread disregard for the rule of law, and little accountability for those who 
conduct human rights abuses, as well as targeted violence and societal discrimination 
against women and girls. 
 
The United States’ extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against 
the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan to its citizens and residents 
and Afghan government problems developing and complying with the rule of law. A top 
national security goal of the United States is to establish relationships, cooperation, 
training, and support of the Afghanistan Government and military in the ongoing war 
against terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 has three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant has frequent contacts6 with his mother and brother, who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. His frequent contacts are a manifestation of his care and 
concern for his relatives living in Afghanistan. Applicant provided between $14,000 and 
$21,000 in financial support for his mother living in Afghanistan. 
 
Applicant’s spouse has four brothers, two sisters, and mother, who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant or his spouse has weekly to monthly contact 
with her two sisters and one brother. Applicant provides about $400 to $600 annually to 
his spouse’s mother.  
 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Afghanistan because 
of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers on behalf 
of the DOD, and he is willing to do so in the future. Numerous Afghan linguists, 
supporting U.S. forces, have family living in Afghanistan. Thousands of United States 
and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Afghanistan are targets of 
terrorists or the Taliban, along with Afghan civilians who support the Afghan government 
and cooperate with coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and 
obligation to his spouse; she has relatives in Afghanistan; and she may be close to 
them. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is [also] a 
                                            
6 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent).  
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e).   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United 
States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationships with relatives living in Afghanistan 
create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists or the Taliban could place 
pressure on his family living in Afghanistan in an effort to cause Applicant to 
compromise classified information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with family in 
Afghanistan and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant has frequent contact with his mother and brother, 
and his spouse has frequent contact with her siblings and mother who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant was born in Afghanistan. 
He married in 1996, and his children are ages 7, 12, 10, and 20. Applicant, his spouse, 
and his four children are U.S. citizens. He immigrated to the United States in 2009, and 
he and his spouse were naturalized as U.S. citizens in 2014.      
 
Applicant’s years of support to the DOD in Afghanistan as a linguist and cultural 
advisor, including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards mitigating 
security concerns. Applicant was serving in Afghanistan as recently as April 2017 
providing critical assistance to U.S. Armed Forces in a dangerous combat environment. 
He has offered to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in 
Afghanistan. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant’s mother, siblings, and in-laws currently live in 
Afghanistan. Like every other resident of Afghanistan, they are at risk from terrorists and 
the Taliban. 
 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower 
and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in 
Afghanistan. Applicant and his relatives living in Afghanistan are potential targets of 
terrorists and the Taliban, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information 
could theoretically add risk to his relatives living in Afghanistan from lawless elements in 
Afghanistan.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Afghanistan are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, family living in the United States, performance of linguist duties in a 
combat zone, and U.S. citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation of 
security concerns. His mother is his primary remaining family connection to Afghanistan, 
and she is in the process of immigrating to the United States. His connections to the 
United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and mitigate the foreign 
influence security concerns under Guideline B. Even if security concerns are not 
mitigated under Guideline B, they are mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,       
. . . determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . . ;7 and 
   
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
In Applicant’s November 24, 2015 SCA, he falsely stated that he left his 
employment from February 2010 to August 2014 as an interpreter/cultural advisor at a 
military installation and from October 2014 to March 2015 as a driver due to “lack of 
work.” On both occasions, he was fired. Applicant admitted that he lied because he was 
worried that he would not be hired if he disclosed he had been fired. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) are established. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) contains one condition that could mitigate security concerns. AG ¶ 
17(a) states, “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” At Applicant’s 
December 23, 2015 OPM PSI, Applicant disclosed that he was fired from the 
employments ending in August 2014 and March 2015. He said he did not provide 
accurate information about leaving the employments because “it is harder to find a job if 
you have been ‘fired’.” GE 2.  
 
The applicability of AG ¶ 17(a) has been limited by several Appeal Board 
decisions. An intentional omission allegation is not mitigated when an applicant admits 
                                            
7 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the omission after an investigator tells him or her that the Government has already 
learned facts establishing the omission.8 If an Applicant provides false information in 
multiple interviews, voluntary, accurate disclosure during the third interview does not 
mitigate the falsification concern.9 In ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 
2007) the Appeal Board considered an applicant’s claim that he promptly disclosed his 
firing from employment to an investigator after falsely denying the termination from 
employment on his security clearance application stating: 
 
. . . Applicant did not disclose his termination from the hotel until he was at 
his security clearance interview. The . . . investigating agent asked about 
the hotel in the context of previous employments and Applicant indicated 
he worked there. The investigator then asked if anyone at the hotel would 
have anything negative to say about Applicant, at which time Applicant 
supplied the investigator with a name and the hotel management. 
Subsequently, Applicant informed the investigator that he had been fired 
from the hotel.  
 
The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2007) affirmed 
the administrative judge’s decision not to credit applicant with making a “prompt, good 
faith [effort] to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts.” Id. at 4-5. 
Stated differently, once it becomes apparent to an applicant that an investigator is likely 
to discover derogatory information, it is too late to receive mitigating credit under AG ¶ 
17(a).  
 
 In the instant case, Applicant disclosed his two terminations from employment 
before being confronted with any information that made it appear likely the investigator 
would discover this information. He fully cooperated with the investigator’s follow-up 
interrogation as indicated by his disclosure that he was told he was fired and his 
explanation that he lied because he needed employment. His falsification of his SCA is 
mitigated. See ISCR Case No. 09-05655, (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2010) (mitigating Guideline 
E falsification allegation under whole-person concept); DISCR No. 93-1390 (App. Bd. 
Jan. 27, 1995) (discussing prompt disclosure requirement); ISCR Case No. 98-0422, 
1999 DOHA LEXIS 49, (A.J. Jan. 22, 1999) (mitigating Guideline E concern). The 
personal conduct concern is mitigated. Even if security concerns are not mitigated 
under Guideline E, they are mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
                                            
8 ISCR Case No. 02-30369 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2006) (sustaining denial of security clearance); 
ISCR Case No. 04-00789 at 7 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006) (reversing grant of security clearance); ISCR 
Case No. 99-0557 at 4 (App. Bd. July 10, 2000) (reversing grant of security clearance).   
 
9 ISCR Case No. 03-00577 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) (sustaining denial of security 
clearance).   
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines E and B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant has frequent contact with his mother and brother; his spouse has 
frequent contact with her mother and siblings; he provides financial support to his 
mother; and all of them are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Their frequent 
contacts and his financial support are manifestations of their care and concern for their 
relatives living in Afghanistan. These relationships raise important foreign influence 
security concerns, and they must be balanced against his connections to the United 
States.  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2009, and he and his spouse were 
naturalized as U.S. citizens in 2014. He swore an Oath of Allegiance to the United 
States. Their four children are U.S. citizens and live in the United States. His closest 
relative in Afghanistan is his mother, and she is in the process of immigrating to the 
United States.      
 
Applicant served as a security guard, linguist, translator, linguist consultant, or 
cultural advisor for about five years in Afghanistan in support of U.S. forces. He 
provided 11 letters of support including from one colonel, three lieutenant colonels, one 
major, one captain, one staff sergeant, one petty officer second class, and several U.S. 
Corps of Engineer Employees. The general sense of those letters is that Applicant is 
diligent, professional, trustworthy, and honest. He provided 68 certificates of 
appreciation lauding his contributions to mission accomplishment in the United States 
and Afghanistan.   
 
   A June 29, 2016, letter from a U.S. Army colonel who worked closely with 
Applicant under combat conditions for eight months is particularly persuasive. He said 
Applicant has “immense character and integrity.”  He is “tremendously hard-working and 
loyal,” and he achieves “phenomenal results.” “He proved instrumental in rebuilding . . . 
security forces from the worst to one of the most capable units within Afghanistan.”  
 
17 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is trustworthy, and the colonel said he would be honored to serve with 
Applicant in the future.  
 
Applicant was serving in a U.S. designated combat zone until shortly before his 
hearing. During his five years of service in Afghanistan, he contributed to the U.S. 
military at personal risk. He is willing to continue to serve in Afghanistan in support of 
U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist and cultural advisor, risking his life on behalf of the U.S. 
combat forces in Afghanistan. All of these circumstances increase the probability that 
Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist 
group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 
(App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past honorable service as a linguist weighs heavily towards 
approval of his security clearance. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 
2008) (affirming grant of security clearance and commenting “Applicant has served as a 
translator and as a cultural liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing 
tensions and facilitating transactions between the two groups. . . . Applicant put his life 
in danger on at least one occasion to protect American lives and interests in 
Afghanistan.”). 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.10 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to threaten 
the Afghan government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and 
those who cooperate and assist the United States. The Afghan government does not 
fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United 
States and Afghan governments are allies in the war on terrorism.       
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence and 
personal conduct security concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
                                            
10 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion).  
 
18 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
