 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-02592 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Corrinne R. Crimmins, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by four drunk driving arrests. He continues to drink and drive. Security concerns regarding 
his alcohol consumption remain. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the alcohol consumption guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). 
 
 On September 28, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was 
held. Applicant testified and called his facility security manager (FSO) as a witness. The 
exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the administrative record without 
objection.1 The hearing transcript was received on October 6, 2017. 
 
  
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 – 3; Applicant’s Exhibits A – F. Correspondence, the notice of hearing, and the 
case management order are appended to the record as Appellate Exhibits I – III. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 61, is married with two adult-age children. He served for 20 years in the 
U.S. Navy, retiring in 1995. Since retiring, Applicant has been primarily employed as a 
defense contractor. He has been with his current employer since 2003. He has received 
numerous awards for his work. He is an active member of a fraternal order of retired 
military members and veterans. He has held a security clearance for over 40 years.2 
 
First Drunk Driving Incident.  In approximately 1978, Applicant was a then 28-
year-old sailor returning from a long deployment to sea and nearing the end of his initial 
enlistment. While on shore leave in a foreign country, Applicant consumed an excessive 
amount of alcohol before getting behind the wheel of a car. He was stopped by military 
police for erratic driving and was subsequently disciplined by the military.3  
 
Second Drunk Driving Incident.  In approximately 1993, Applicant, who was then 
a 37-year-old married father of two children, consumed an excessive amount of alcohol 
with a friend. He was stopped by police for erratic driving and charged with driving under 
the influence (DUI). He pled guilty, receiving a fine and his driving privileges were 
suspended for 60 days.4 
 
Third Drunk Driving Incident.  In approximately 1998, Applicant, who was then 
43 years old and, by that point, retired from the Navy and working as a defense contractor, 
was arrested for driving while intoxicated (DWI). After work, Applicant went to a local bar, 
consumed too much alcohol, and decided to get behind the wheel of his car. He was 
stopped by police for erratic driving and arrested and charged with DWI. He subsequently 
pled guilty to the DWI charge. He received a 30-day suspended jail sentence, 18 months 
of unsupervised probation, and a fine. His driver’s license was also suspended, and he 
was required to complete a six-week alcohol education course.5 
 
Fourth Drunk Driving Incident.  In approximately 2013, Applicant, who was then 
58 years old and working for his current employer, was arrested for DUI. He consumed 
an excessive amount of alcohol watching and celebrating his favorite football team beat 
their rival. He was stopped by police for erratic driving and was arrested for DUI. He 
provided a breath sample, which measured a blood alcohol concentration level of .18.  
 
In May 2014, Applicant pled guilty to the DUI charge. He was sentenced to 180-
days in jail (171 days suspended) and two years of probation. He was ordered to complete 
12 weeks of alcohol counseling and attend a drunk driving victim impact panel. He was 
                                                          
2 Transcript (Tr.) 16-18, 30; Exhibits A-C.  
 
3 Tr. 18-19; Exhibit 2 at 5; Exhibit D at 2.  
 
4 Tr. 19-20; Exhibit 2 at 5; Exhibit D at 2. 
 
5 Tr. 21; Exhibit 2 at 4; Exhibit D at 2-3.  
 
 
3 
 
also ordered to attend alcoholics anonymous at least once a week while on probation and 
to abstain from alcohol.6  
 
Applicant completed the terms of his probation in 2016, including successfully 
completing the court-mandated alcohol counseling. He then started consuming alcohol 
again. He admits to drinking alcohol and then driving his car, including a week before his 
hearing. He stopped attending AA after his probation was completed. Several AA 
members approached Applicant about becoming his sponsor, but he declined their 
offers.7  
 
Applicant self-reported his recent DUI arrest and conviction to his FSO. He also 
reported his recent DUI and past drunk driving incidents on his security clearance 
application. He then discussed his past alcohol issues with a security clearance 
background investigator.8  
 
Applicant’s FSO testified, confirming that Applicant self-reported the recent DUI. 
She noted that it was the first time in 15 years that she has been working in the defense 
industry that someone had made such a self-report of potentially derogatory information 
to her. She further noted that Applicant reached out to her after work hours to make the 
notification. Applicant also informed the FSO about his past drunk driving incidents. The 
FSO provided her favorable opinion regarding Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
overall character. Her high opinion of Applicant is held by several others, including 
Applicant’s current supervisor and government customer.9  
 
The FSO further testified that Applicant’s employer has several government 
contracts that require random alcohol and drug screening for their employees. She went 
on to state that the company would be willing to implement any conditions that the 
government saw fit to impose on Applicant’s continued access to classified information, 
including instituting random alcohol screening and submitting regular reports.10 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards). 
                                                          
6 Tr. 21-23; Exhibit 2 at 2-4; Exhibit 3; Exhibit D at 3-4.  
 
7 Tr. 24-33; Exhibit C.  
 
8 Tr. 24; Exhibits 2-3.  
 
9 Tr. 36-38; Exhibit F.  
 
10 Tr. 39.  
 
4 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.11 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
                                                          
11 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Likewise, a judge can only use non-alleged conduct for specific 
limited purposes, such as, assessing mitigation and credibility, unless an applicant is placed on notice that 
such conduct also raises a security concern. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 Applicant’s four drunk driving arrests raise a security concern, which is explained 
at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline G, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, . . . regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder;  
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment . . .; 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed a treatment 
program along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear 
and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations. 
 
 Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. Here, Applicant has 
had four drunk driving arrests spread out over 40 years, starting in his 20s to his late 50s. 
Each time, the level of punishment meted out by the authorities has increased. He has 
also received ever-increasing treatment and counseling. Applicant indicated in his Answer 
 
6 
 
that the victim impact panel that he was ordered to attend following the most recent DUI 
conviction had a significant impact. Notwithstanding the preceding, Applicant has not 
altered his behavior to avoid the recurrence of similar security-significant conduct. 
Notably, he continues to drink and drive. In light of Applicant’s history of alcohol-related 
criminal conduct, his decision to continue drinking and driving undercuts the mitigating 
value of the passage of time and the other favorable evidence. AG ¶ 22(a) applies in full, 
AG ¶ 22(b) applies in part. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Security concerns 
regarding Applicant’s alcohol use remain.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 In addition to the specific adjudicative guidelines at issue, a judge must also take 
into account factors that are applicable to all cases. These factors are grouped together 
under the all-encompassing umbrella of the whole-person concept.12 I hereby incorporate 
my above analysis and highlight some additional whole-person matters.  
  
 Applicant served in the U.S. military for 20 years. After retiring from the military, he 
continued his service to the nation as a contractor. He self-reported the information about 
his recent DUI and past drunk driving arrests. He also candidly revealed at hearing that 
he continues to drink and drive. Such service and candor, as well as the other favorable 
record evidence, raise favorable inferences regarding his eligibility for continued access 
to classified information. However, this favorable evidence is insufficient to fully mitigate 
the security concerns at issue. Applicant has yet to fully appreciate the significance of his 
past alcohol-related criminal conduct and reform his behavior. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to 
classified information.13 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
12 See AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
 
13 In light of the FSO’s testimony and the other favorable evidence, I considered the exceptions listed in 
SEAD-4, Appendix C. See SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h). However, the applicability of this Appendix to 
contractor cases adjudicated under the Directive remains a question. Furthermore, even if applicable, no 
implementation guidance has yet been issued. Accordingly, at this time, I decline to rule or give a formal 
recommendation on this issue. 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
