 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-00729  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s former employer significantly reduced her wages due to a business 
downturn, before laying her off. She turned in two vehicles that she could no longer 
afford for voluntary repossession, and fell behind on some consumer debts. Since 
gaining her current employment she has made arrangements to repay her former 
delinquencies and documented payments made under those agreements, mitigating 
security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is granted.   
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 1, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86).1 On July 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
                                                 
1 The SF-86 provided by Department Counsel in the File of Relevant Materials (FORM) contains only the 
odd-numbered pages of Applicant’s 51-page clearance application. Since her FORM response contained 
sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns, this due-process error is found to be harmless. It 
would be improper to base an adverse decision on this incomplete record, however. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 21, 2016. She admitted all of the SOR 
allegations concerning delinquent debts, with explanations that she had made 
arrangements to repay them, and requested that her case be decided by an 
administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On August 15, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant 
on August 17, 2016, and received by her on September 1, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in writing, with additional evidence. Her 
undated FORM response was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) on September 12, 2016. She did not object to Items 1 through 6, which are 
admitted into evidence. Applicant’s FORM response, to which Department Counsel had 
no objection, is marked Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the 
case to me on May 22, 2017.  
 
The SOR and FORM in this case were issued under the adjudicative guidelines 
that came into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent 
Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions2 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered 
the previous eligibility guidelines, as well as the new SEAD 4 AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the currently effective SEAD 4 
AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old, and married. She is a high school graduate, with no 
prior military or civil service employment. This is her first application for a security 
clearance. She was hired as a General Clerk II by her current employer in September 
2015. (Item 3; Item 4.)  
                                                 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant experienced a 25% cut in her hourly wage in early May 2014, due to a 
business downturn suffered by the company that employed her at the time. That 
company laid her off in September 2014, and she began six months of part-time 
employment by a major retail chain the following month. She was temporarily 
unemployed again before starting her current employment in 2015. She admitted that 
she had seven delinquent debts totaling $25,553, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, 
and explained that she had become unable to make the required payments on those 
debts due to her reduced pay between May 2014 and September 2015. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 Two of those debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) were deficiency balances claimed by 
automobile loan creditors after she and her husband surrendered the two vehicles 
securing those joint loans for voluntary repossession. These debts totaled $22,274, and 
were slightly over $11,000 each as of her October 2015 credit report. She contacted 
representatives of the two creditors during July 2016, and made arrangements to repay 
these debts at the rate of $100 per month. In her FORM response she provided 
documentation that she had made those payments. (Item 2; AE A.) 
 
 The remaining five formerly delinquent debts involved four revolving credit 
accounts and a utility bill, and totaled $3,279 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.g). As of the close 
of the record, she had complied with the agreements she made to fully resolve the three 
debts described in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e, and had made the first of three creditor-
agreed monthly payments toward fully resolving the debts described in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 
1.g. Her remaining monthly payments toward these two accounts, totaling $700, were 
scheduled for automatic debit payments in September and October 2016. (Item 2; Item 
5; AE A.)  
 
 Department Counsel commented in the FORM that Applicant and her family went 
on one-week Caribbean cruise vacations in 2012 and 2015, and implied that this 
indicated a lack of responsible financial decisions in the face of her unplanned loss of 
income due to her pay reduction and subsequent lay-off. In her FORM response, 
Applicant provided documentation showing that these cruises were gifts to her family 
from her mother-in-law, who paid all expenses for both vacations. (AE A.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
 
 
4 
 
 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
 
5 
 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was temporarily unable repay two vehicle loans and five formerly 
delinquent consumer debts, which demonstrated a history of not meeting financial 
obligations. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial issues were largely caused by her involuntary pay reduction 
and lay-off, followed by a period of unemployment and part-time retail work. She has 
maintained her current employment for two years, and has either fully repaid or is 
making agreed monthly payments toward all of her formerly delinquent debts. She 
initiated good-faith repayment arrangements with all of her SOR-listed creditors, and 
has either fulfilled or is adhering to each of those agreements with no indication of new 
financial issues. Applicant has successfully addressed her former delinquencies, and 
demonstrated that her financial issues are unlikely to recur. The record establishes full 
mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 
20(d). 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the financial issues she 
encountered over the past several years. The likelihood that financial problems will 
recur is small. The potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is minimized by the 
resolution of Applicant’s formerly outstanding debts through repayment or ongoing 
agreed repayment plans. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. She fully met her 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
