 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02720 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on December 12, 
2016. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant did not object to the Government’s 
evidence and the documents are admitted. Applicant provided documents that are 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C.2 The Government did not object, and 
they are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old. He has worked for federal contractors since 2003, and 
his present employer, also a federal contractor, since December 2012. Applicant served 
in the military from 1971 to 1991, when he retired. He married in 1972. He and his wife 
have grown children, ages 44 and 42.3 
 
 In April 2015, Applicant tested positive for marijuana on a random drug screening 
test by his employer. He held a security clearance at that time. During an interview by a 
government investigator on May 30, 2016, he explained the circumstances of his use.4  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that he was feeling especially sad during this time 
as he was reflecting on the loss of his mother, which happened years before, and his  
current health issues. At that time, he was plagued with the possibility that he had cancer. 
The test results were negative, but he continued to be concerned about his health. He did 
not confide in anyone or seek counseling because he did not want to appear weak due 
to his difficulty in dealing with stress. He did not tell his spouse because he did not want 
to cause her unnecessary stress.5  
 
 Applicant addressed his stress by playing music with a band. He went to a venue 
where musicians played in an impromptu style. He had been to the venue previously, but 
was not a regular attendee. He was unaware if drugs were present at the venue. He could 
not recall specifically, but estimated he began going to the venue in early 2015. After his 
cancer biopsy, he met a man at the venue, who was about his age and seemed to be 
caring, trustworthy, and understanding. Although the man was not a friend, Applicant was 
relaxed and relieved that he could unburden himself by confiding to the man about his 
                                                          
2 AE A is a complete copy of the FORM that was returned by Applicant. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Items 1, 2, 4. 
 
5 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 
health problems. The man asked if Applicant had ever used marijuana. Applicant told him 
he had never tried the drug. The man explained he could get some for Applicant, and it 
would help him “take the edge off.” Applicant agreed to try it because he did not want to 
be sad anymore.6  
 
The next day the man provided Applicant with a marijuana cigarette. Applicant 
brought the cigarette home and smoked about three quarters of it in his bathroom. He felt 
a sense of paranoia and stopped smoking it. He did not feel any effects. He told the 
investigator that all he felt was guilt and paranoia at the time. He knew what he did was 
wrong and had in the past been against all illegal drug use. Applicant’s spouse was not 
present at the time. When she returned home, Applicant confessed to her that he had 
used marijuana. His wife was upset and disappointed with him. They agreed that in the 
future, he would confide in her about his issues. Although she was disappointed with him, 
she supported him to ensure he never made the same mistake again.7 
 
Applicant was selected for a random drug screen when he returned to work and 
tested positive. Applicant contacted his supervisor and told him about his marijuana use. 
He was suspended without pay for 30 days. He was required to complete and pay for a 
drug evaluation and drug screenings. He received counseling from a substance abuse 
professional (SAP). She recommended he complete eight hours of substance abuse 
education, which he did. He was then referred back to the SAP for a final evaluation. He 
was cleared to return to duty and required to complete six additional random drug 
screenings in the next twelve months, in addition to being included in the regular random 
drug screening program. Applicant successfully completed the drug screening in May 
2016.8  
 
Applicant had over 20 years of positive work performance with federal contractors. 
His supervisors held him in high regard. Applicant told the investigator that he learned his 
lesson to never use illegal drugs again. His actions had serious negative implications on 
his work and marriage. He deeply regretted his decision almost immediately after using 
the marijuana because it was illegal. He had never used marijuana prior to this incident. 
After he used it on that occasion, he disassociated himself from the man who gave it to 
him and has never communicated with him again. Applicant has not returned to the music 
venue. He has stayed away from the entire music scene so he can move forward in his 
life. Applicant has never knowingly associated with anyone who used illegal drugs, with 
the exception of this one incident. Applicant told the investigator that he will never engage 
in the illegal use of a drug again.9  
 
                                                          
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Item 5. 
 
8 Item 5. 
 
9 Item 5.  
 
4 
 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted his error in judgment. He indicated 
he was ashamed of his conduct. He is proud of his military service, and his work as a 
government contractor. He again stated that he will never use illegal drugs in the future. 
He provided a copy of a negative drug screening from May 2015. He also provided a letter 
from the SAP confirming Applicant completed the SAP follow-up evaluation and the 
education classes. She commented that Applicant was invested in his treatment and 
completed everything required of him.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
10 Item 2; AE B, C. 
 
5 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for drug involvement and substance 
misuse is set out in AG & 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 25 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any substance misuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; and  
 
 (f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant tested positive for marijuana during a random drug screen in April 2015. 
He held a security clearance at that time. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome the problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were being used . . . ; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
  
 Applicant used marijuana on one occasion in April 2015. He admitted he was 
struggling with being depressed and having concerns about his health. He admitted he 
made a serious mistake when he smoked marijuana. He felt guilty and paranoid about 
his action. His wife was disappointed with him, but he agreed to confide in her if he has 
future concerns. He has never used any other illegal drugs in the past and persuasively 
indicated he will never use illegal drugs in the future. I find his one-time use of marijuana 
happened under unique circumstances and are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant disassociated himself with the man who provided him the marijuana. He 
has also never returned to the venue where he met the man. He does not intend to return 
there in the future. Applicant completed the drug evaluation by the SAP. He completed 
the required education courses and the additional random drug screenings conducted by 
his employer during the subsequent 12-month period, all with negative results. His SAP 
confirmed he successfully completed all requirements of the program. I find AG ¶¶ 26(b) 
applies. Although the specific language of AG ¶ 26(d) may not apply, I find that its general 
intent is applicable, in that Applicant completed the requirements imposed on him by the 
SAP and his employer.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 66 years old and had 20 years of honorable service in the military. He 
has worked for federal contractors since 2003. Applicant admitted he made a grave 
mistake when he used marijuana on one occasion while holding a security clearance. He 
acknowledged and accepted responsibility for his conduct. He successfully completed all 
of his employer’s requirements, including random drug screenings for 12 months. He 
disassociated himself from the man who gave him the marijuana, and he no longer goes 
to the venue where he met him. Applicant is remorseful and understands the seriousness 
of his conduct. I believe this was a one-time incident that will never happen again. 
Applicant is deserving of a second chance. I do not have questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under Guideline H, drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
