 1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 16-02444 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tovah Minster Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate financial 
security concerns. 
Statement of the Case 
On December 23, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on February 11, 2016. (Item 3, Personal 
Security Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. On October 5, 2016, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
  2 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2016. She admitted the three 
financial allegations but provided detailed information to mitigate the allegations. (Item 6) 
Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on December 7, 2016. Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on December 29, 2016, and she was provided 
the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the disqualifying conditions. (Item 8) Applicant timely provided additional information in 
response to the FORM on January 10, 2017. (Item 7) Department Counsel had no 
objection to consideration of the additional material. (Item 11) I was assigned the case on 
October 1, 2017.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017.  Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 3) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. She was further advised 
that she could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the administrative judge could determine that she waived any 
objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant responded to the FORM (Item 
9), but she did not object to consideration of the PSI. Since Applicant did not object to 
consideration of the PSI, I will consider the information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact. Applicant is 69 years old, and a 1965 high school graduate. She was first granted 
eligibility for access to classified information in 1978. She worked as a government 
employee at an Air Force base from 1979 until 1999. After leaving government service, 
she worked for and is still employed by a defense contractor at the same Air Force base 
as a configuration manager. She was last cleared and is stilled cleared for eligibility for 
access to classified information in March 2006. She married in September 1970, and 
divorced in April 1997. She has two grown children. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated December 23, 
2015; Item 3, PSI, dated February 11, 2016)  
  3 
 
The SOR alleges, and a credit report confirms (Item 4) that Applicant has a state 
tax lien entered in June 2011 for $17,863 (SOR 1.a), and a federal tax lien entered against 
her in April 2008 for $23,622 (SOR 1.b). Also alleged is a telephone debt in collection for 
$48 (SOR 1.c) 
Applicant admitted that he did not timely file her 2002 and 2003 federal and state 
income tax returns. She lost the W-2 forms initially provided by her company. When she 
realized she needed the W-2s, the company she worked for had sold their interest in the 
company to a business headquartered outside the United States. She had a difficult time 
receiving the W-2s. She notified the federal and state tax authorities and started paying 
the state $200 per month and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $300 per month towards 
the taxes. (Item 3, PSI, at 4) She was finally able to obtain the proper W-2s and file her 
federal and state tax returns for tax years 2002 and 2003.  
The IRS released the federal tax lien on April 27, 2016, since pay documents from 
her employer and the taxes she paid resolved the federal tax debt. (Item 7) Applicant 
provided documents from the state tax office showing they refunded all of the taxes 
Applicant paid to them for tax years 2002 and 2003. (Item 10) Applicant is current with 
her federal and state taxes.  
The $48 telephone debt was actually owed to Applicant by the phone company. A 
debt collection agency inadvertently entered a debt against Applicant. The telephone 
company refunded the $48 to Applicant and the matter has been resolved. (Item 9, 
Response to FORM, dated January 10, 2017) 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
  4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified and sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) The 
financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly 
or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave 
in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with their creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent with 
the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her finances 
in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
Applicant admits to delinquent federal and state tax debts resulting from her 
inadvertent failure to timely file her 2002 and 2003 federal and state income tax returns. 
She also admits to a telephone debt in collection. This information raises the following 
security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
  5 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.   
 
I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
 
The mitigating conditions apply. Applicant incurred federal and state income tax 
debt because she was unable to timely file her 2002 and 2003 income tax returns. She 
lost the W-2s provided by her employer. The employer was now located out of the United 
States making it difficult to get the proper forms. Applicant notified the federal and state 
tax authorities and setup payment plans until the taxes could be filed and resolved. The 
state and federal taxes have been paid and Applicant received refunds.  
 
The tax issues happened under circumstances unlikely to recur, and the problems 
creating the tax issues were beyond her control. There are clear indications the financial 
problems have been resolved. Applicant’s efforts to notify the tax authorities and make 
payments until the issue could be resolved indicates her good-faith efforts to repay the 
creditors and resolve he debt. Applicant did not report any financial counseling, but there 
are clear indications the problem has been resolved.  
 
  6 
 
 Normally, failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance 
with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified and sensitive 
information. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligation to file tax 
returns does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required 
for a grant of access to classified or sensitive information. Where an applicant may have 
attempted to correct the tax return problem, there must still be careful consideration of 
the applicant’s trustworthiness in view of his longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility by failing to timely file income tax returns. However, Applicant tried to 
negate the federal and state tax problems when she was unable to obtain the required 
pay documents. She contacted the appropriate tax authorities, explained the problems, 
and made payments on the taxes while the matter was being researched and resolved. 
She demonstrated the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons 
granted access to classified or sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant provided enough details about what she did to address the debts alleged 
in the SOR. She provided sufficient documentation to show proof of payments, 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, copies of 
debt disputes, evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other evidence of 
progress or resolution. There is sufficient evidence to establish that Applicant made great 
progress resolving her tax debts. Applicant established a track record of paying her tax 
debt and acting in a financially responsible manner. There is ample evidence of 
responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliable conduct and actions by Applicant 
towards her finances. Applicant met her burden to establish hers good-faith efforts to 
resolve his remaining debts. She established that she acted with reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards her financial 
obligations. There is sufficient assurance that her financial problems are resolved, are 
under control, and will not recur in the future. Her reasonable and responsible actions 
towards her finances is a strong indication that she will protect and safeguard classified 
or sensitive information. Applicant mitigated financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant has been 
eligible for access to classified information since 1978 with no indications of any problems 
or security issues. Applicant incurred delinquent debt when she could not timely file her 
2002 and 2003 federal and state income tax returns. She has since received the 
necessary pay documents, filed the returns, and paid all taxes owed. Another small debt 
was not her debt but the responsibility of the creditor. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, 
and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
