 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-01310 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from three charged-off 
student loans for about $66,000. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on November 12, 2014.1 This document is commonly known 
as a security clearance application. Thereafter, on October 29, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
2 
 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 22, 2016. He requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. His response consisted of (1) 
handwritten responses on a copy of the SOR in which he admitted the allegations, and 
(2) a two-page handwritten memorandum. He did not submit any enclosures or 
attachments with his answer.       
 
On January 6, 2017, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it January 20, 2017. He replied to the FORM with a four-page 
memorandum, which is made part of the record as Exhibit A. He did not submit any 
enclosures or attachments with his reply. The case was assigned to me October 1, 
2017.     
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the February 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, as required under 
¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.2 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 prohibits 
receipt and consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating witnesses. The 
Directive provides no exception to the authentication requirement. Indeed, the 
authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits 
consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
ROI was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a “waiver” of the 
authentication requirement. In my view, Department Counsel is conflating or confusing 
the terms waiver and forfeiture.3 In the law of evidence, errors are preserved by timely 
objections, and relief on appeal is granted from a preserved error unless it is harmless 
(the harmless-error doctrine). Waiver is the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment of 
a legal right or advantage. With a waiver, there is no error to correct on appeal and no 
relief to grant. On the other hand, failure to make a timely objection usually forfeits any 
error, and relief on appeal is appropriate from a forfeited error only upon a showing that 
the error was plain, obvious, and prejudicial (the plain-error doctrine).   
                                                          
2 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
3 See United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725 (1993) (in this opinion, the Supreme Court distinguishes 
between forfeiture and waiver).  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant did not address the ROI in his reply to the FORM. The written record 
does not demonstrate that Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the 
concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that 
he understood the implications of waiving an objection. Accordingly, given the lack of an 
authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my decision.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as an appointment center clerk for a federal contractor. He has been so employed since 
November 2014. His educational background includes a bachelor’s degree awarded in 
2009. He has never married and has no children.    
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of three 
charged-off student loan accounts for about $66,000. The delinquent accounts are 
established by Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR, his answers to written 
interrogatories, and credit reports from December 2014, February 2016, and January 
2017.4 There is no documentation in the written record to establish that any of the 
delinquent accounts were paid, settled or compromised, in a payment arrangement, 
cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved.  
 
In his March 2016 answers to written interrogatories, Applicant explained the 
following about the charged-off student loans: 
 
I have not taken action to resolve the aforementioned debts, as I have not 
yet finalized any plans or arrangements. I am currently looking into student 
loan debt consolidation through my bank, but have to schedule a time with 
them to discuss my options with my parents who are currently co-signers 
on these accounts. If at all possible, I would like to submit documentation 
for these within the next two (2) months.5 
 
 Applicant did not submit such documentation when he answered the SOR about 
eight months later in November 2016. Nor did he submit such documentation in his 
February 2017 reply to the FORM. In his reply, Applicant attributed his financial 
problems and inability to resolve the charged-off student loans to a history of 
unemployment and underemployment beginning upon the award of his bachelor’s 
degree in 2009 and continuing until he obtained his current job in 2014.6  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Exhibits 4, 5, 6, and 7.  
 
5 Exhibit 4.  
 
6 Exhibit A.  
 
 
4 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.7 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.8 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”9 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.10 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.11 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.12 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.13 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.14 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.15 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
                                                          
7 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
8 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
9 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
10 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
 
5 
 
facts that have been admitted or proven.16 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.17 
  
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.18 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F, as established by the 
three charged-off student loans for about $66,000. There is no evidence that Applicant 
has made any progress in resolving the debts. His problematic financial history 
                                                          
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
18 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
suggests he may be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and 
safeguarding classified information.  
 
 What’s missing here is documentation in support of Applicant’s case. There is no 
documentation to establish that he has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the delinquent student loans. Although his financial problems appear to be 
connected to a lengthy history of unemployment and underemployment that preceded 
his current job, I cannot conclude that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances given the state of the written record. He has not produced a single page 
of documentation from the original lenders or the current companies servicing the loans. 
Moreover, given that he requested a decision based on the written hearing in lieu of a 
hearing, the lack of documentation undermines his case. It’s the responsibility of the 
individual applicant to produce relevant documentation in support of their case. Here, 
Applicant has not met his burden of production because he did not present sufficient 
documentation showing that he is making some sort of a good-faith effort to resolve the 
delinquent student loans.  
  
 Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In 
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the 
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also 
considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
