 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03358 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 26, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated May 26, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated December 23, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on January 25, 2017, and he was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on February 
6, 2017. Applicant’s response was due on March 8, 2017. As of October 1, 2017, 
Applicant had not submitted any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.j.) of the SOR. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has served as a 
solid state technician since March 2004. He attended a university for two years, but did 
not receive a degree. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army inactive reserve in 1992, and 
he was honorably discharged in 1996. He was granted a secret security clearance in 
March 1993, while in the U.S. Army. Applicant was married the first time in 1994 and 
divorced in 1996. He married the second time in 2001 and divorced in 2014. He has 
resided with a cohabitant since 2015. He has one son, born in 2000, and two daughters, 
born in 1998 and 2005.  
 
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations3 
It appears that Applicant’s finances became an issue in 2008 when a state tax lien 
was filed against him. However, Applicant claims his finances became a problem only 
after he was divorced in 2014, at which time he lost his ex-wife’s income, and incurred 
child support expenses. As a result, he was unable to make timely payments on his first 
and second mortgages, as well as for other accounts, because he had insufficient funds 
to do so. He indicated that he is currently trying to get back on his feet financially. 
The SOR identified ten purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, as generally reflected by his 2015 and 2016 credit reports. Those debts, 
totaling approximately $126,331, their current status, according to the credit reports, other 
evidence submitted by the Government, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are 
described below. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.e.): These are a first mortgage with a high credit of $107,920, 
a past-due balance of $33,641, and a remaining balance of $97,338, for which the 
foreclosure process has started (SOR ¶ 1.a.); and a home equity mortgage with a high 
credit of $26,980, a past-due balance of $1,639, and a remaining balance of $25,132 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.), that were placed for collection. Applicant admitted in his Answer to the SOR 
that the accounts remain delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has 
made any efforts to contact the creditors or collection agents to resolve them. The 
accounts have not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is a gas utility account with an unpaid balance of $230 that was 
placed for collection. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account 
remains delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts 
to contact the creditor or collection agent to resolve it. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a power utility account with an unpaid balance of $212 that 
was placed for collection. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account 
remains delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts 
to contact the creditor or collection agent to resolve it. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a state tax lien for $1,844 that was entered against Applicant 
in 2008. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account remains 
delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts to contact 
the state to resolve it. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): This is a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of $968 
that was placed for collection. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the 
account remains delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made 
                                                          
3 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 3, supra note 1; Item 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 20, 
2015; Item 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated September 16, 2016); and Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated 
December 23, 2016). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
any efforts to contact the creditor or collection agent to resolve it. The account has not 
been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): This is a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of $368 
that was placed for collection and sold to a debt purchaser. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted that the account remains delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate 
that Applicant has made any efforts to contact the creditor, collection agent, or debt 
purchaser to resolve it. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): This is an unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance of 
$100 that was placed for collection. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the 
account remains delinquent. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has made 
any efforts to contact the creditor or collection agent to resolve it. The account has not 
been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.j.): These are two medical accounts with unpaid balances of 
$74 and $65 that were placed for collection with the different collection agents. Applicant 
admitted in his Answer to the SOR that the accounts remain delinquent. There is no 
evidence to indicate that Applicant has made any efforts to contact the creditors or 
collection agents to resolve them. The accounts have not been resolved. 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of any financial 
counseling. There is no evidence that Applicant ever contacted his creditors or collection 
agents either to research or validate the accounts, or to arrange repayment plans. There 
is no evidence that Applicant ever disputed the accounts either with the creditors or the 
credit reporting agencies. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his financial 
situation is now under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”4 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”5   
 
                                                          
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”6 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced substantial 
evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant has the 
burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or 
mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.7  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”8  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”9 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
                                                          
6 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
8 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. Applicant’s credit reports reflect ten delinquent accounts, and he has admitted 
that the accounts are still delinquent. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
 
7 
                                      
 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”10 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating factors apply. 
Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to his 2014 divorce, and in doing so he ignored 
his 2008 tax lien. The statement that the divorce resulted in the loss of his ex-wife’s 
earnings, and the child support added to his financial burdens, without substantially more 
information, does not support his contentions. There is no evidence of the amount of the 
lost earnings or the amount of the child support. Rather than addressing the ten accounts, 
Applicant simply took no action to resolve them, including ones with the modest sums of 
$65 and $75, claiming he had insufficient funds to do so. The Government is entitled to 
rely on credit reports in these proceedings as ordinary business record exceptions to the 
hearsay rule. There was no evidence submitted “to establish that those documents were 
improperly or irregularly produced, or produced in circumstances that would render their 
reliability suspect.”11 Moreover, with respect to credit reports, the Appeal Board stated:12 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations . . . At that point, the 
burden shifts to Applicant to establish either that [he or she] is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
                                                          
10 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 07-08925 at 3 (App. Bd. September 15, 2008). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. 
Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without further action, are insufficient. 
 
There is no evidence of a good-faith effort to contact the creditors to resolve the 
accounts.13 There is little evidence that the conditions that may have resulted in the 
financial issues were largely beyond Applicant=s control. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling, a budget, or any disputes. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his 
financial situation is now under control. Equally as important, there is no evidence that 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, and that failure to do so continues 
to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.14 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.15   
                                                          
13 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
15 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no evidence of 
misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected information. He was 
honorably discharged from the U.S. Army. He has been employed by the same employer 
continuously since 2004.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There are ten delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR with a combined unpaid 
balance of $126,331. Although Applicant received the SOR in December 2016, and he 
was aware of his delinquent debts for a period even before he received the SOR, he made 
no efforts since that time to address any of his delinquent accounts, including ones with 
the modest sums of $65 and $75. He failed to dispute any of them. It appears that he 
simply ignored the debts. Considering the lack of evidence regarding his current finances, 
and the absence of character evidence regarding Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and 
trustworthiness, I am unable to reach a positive conclusion pertaining to Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:16 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a very poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, avoiding the debts in his name, and failing to promise to take any 
corrective actions. Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
