 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-02852 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J Connelly, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. He defaulted on his student loan obligations and, despite earning 
a six-figure salary, his student loans remain in collection. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry. In response to relevant 
questions, Applicant reported on the application that he had a relatively minor delinquent 
credit card account ($272). He indicated that he was in the process of resolving this debt. 
During the ensuing background investigation, Applicant was confronted by an investigator 
with information indicating that his student loans were seriously past due. He told the 
investigator that he was in contact with the company servicing his student loans and was 
in the process of resolving the situation. (Items 2, 3.) 
 
On September 26, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline. Specifically, the SOR lists six student loan accounts in collection 
status totaling over $30,000. The SOR also alleges a past-due credit card account and 
the minor credit card account Applicant listed on his application (SOR 1.h). 
 
 
2 
 
 
On November 21, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR. He admits all the SOR 
allegations. With his Answer, Applicant submitted documentation that reflects he has nine 
outstanding student loan accounts totaling over $50,000. (Item 2.)  
 
 On December 29, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant six exhibits (Items 1 – 6) that the Government offers for 
admission into the record. Applicant responded to the FORM on January 31, 2016. With 
his Response, Applicant submitted four exhibits (Exhibits A – D).1 Without objection, 
Items 1 – 6, Applicant’s Response, and Exhibits A – D are admitted into the record. 
 
 On October 1, 2017, after the Hearing Office received confirmation that Applicant 
remained sponsored for a clearance, I was assigned the case for decision. I reopened 
the record to give the parties the opportunity to submit updated information. (Appellate 
Exhibit I.) Applicant timely submitted seven additional exhibits (Exhibits E – K).2 Without 
objection, Exhibits E – K are admitted into the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 40, was born in a country in the Horn of Africa. He became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2012. He holds an associate’s degree in business and a bachelor’s degree 
in economics. He is currently working abroad as a linguist in support of the U.S. military. 
Applicant has received awards for his work, and a U.S. military member who served with 
him in the overseas location provided a favorable recommendation letter. Applicant is also 
a U.S. military reservist. He was first granted a security clearance in approximately 2013.3 
 
Applicant was hired as a federal contractor in April 2015. Before then, he primarily 
worked in low-paying jobs in the U.S. retail sector. He started his overseas contract 
assignment as a linguist in support of the U.S. military in September 2016. An undated 
offer letter from Applicant’s current employer for Applicant’s current position indicates that 
he would receive an annual salary of approximately $115,000. A personal financial 
statement from April 2016 reflects that, after paying his monthly expenses and debts, 
Applicant has a monthly shortfall of over $3,500.4  
                                                          
1 These exhibits were not pre-marked or organized. For ease of reference in case of appellate review, 
Exhibits A is a reference letter; Exhibit B is an undated student loan balance statement reflecting a $53,000 
balance, which includes $11,000 in fees and costs; Exhibit C consists of bank statements from 2015 and 
2016 reflecting six payments from December 2016 through January 2017; Exhibit D reflects a consolidation 
loan application signed by Applicant on December 27, 2016.  
 
2 These exhibits were also not pre-marked or organized. Exhibits E, Applicant’s email from September 30, 
2017; Exhibit F, another email from September 30th confirming a student loan payment; Exhibit G, student 
loan payment history; Exhibit H, offer letter from employer; Exhibit I, DD 214; Exhibit J, certificates of 
completion and awards; Exhibit K, second copy of Exhibit A. 
 
3 Items 2, 3; Exhibits A, H – J.  
 
4 Answer, attached Letter of Authorization; Items 2, 6; Exhibit H.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant defaulted on his student loans. He claims to have consolidated and 
rehabilitated his student loans before the SOR was issued, but did not provide 
documentation to corroborate his claims.5 The records Applicant submitted reflect that he 
has made irregular and inconsistent student loan payments since 2015.6 He did not 
submit a copy of a repayment plan for his student loans, nor documentation showing that 
he is abiding by the terms of such a plan. Applicant also did not submit proof that he 
resolved the two relatively minor past-due credit card accounts referenced in the SOR 
(1.g and 1.h). One of these debts, SOR 1.h, was the debt that Applicant reported on his 
April 2015 security clearance application and claimed to be addressing.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards).7 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
                                                          
5 Item 1; Exhibit E.  
 
6 Exhibits C, F, and G reflect the following student loan payments: July 2015 ($210); August 2015 ($192); 
September 2015 ($253); October 2015 ($230); November 2015 ($92); December 2015 ($192); December 
2016 ($585); January 2017 ($585); March 2017 ($354); July 2017 (2 payments totaling $663); August 2017 
(2 payments totaling $810); September 2017 ($300); October 2017 ($355).  
 
7 Nonetheless, I considered the previous version of the guidelines, which were in effect when the SOR was 
issued, and my ultimate conclusion would have been the same. 
 
4 
 
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.8 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems raise a security concern, which is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 The concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise sensitive information or engage in other illegality 
                                                          
8 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
 
 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information.9 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all pertinent disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicants are not required to be debt free. They are also not required to resolve 
all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the debts listed in the SOR first. 
However, they are expected to present evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate security 
concerns raised by their conduct and circumstances, to include the accumulation of 
delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they manage their 
finances in a manner expected of all prospective and active clearance holders.10  
 
Here, Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. His past 
financial problems may be attributable to some matters largely beyond his control, such 
as the inability to obtain a well-paying job after earning his undergraduate degree because 
of the recent U.S. economic recession. However, he has been gainfully employed as a 
federal contractor since April 2015, and has been earning a six-figure salary since 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012). 
 
10 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 20, 2016) (“It is reasonable for Judges to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of individual debts.”).  
 
6 
 
 
approximately September 2016. Since 2015, Applicant has only made irregular and 
inconsistent student loan payments and the record reflects that they remain in collection 
status.11 He did not provide any documentation that he addressed and resolved the 
relatively minor collection account referenced in SOR 1.h, which he claimed in his April 
2015 security clearance application to be in the process of resolving. See ISCR Case No. 
14-03069 (App. Bd. July 30, 2015) (“Promises to resolve debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of debt resolution.”) 
 
Accordingly, I find that AG ¶¶ 19(a) – 19(c) apply. None of the mitigating conditions 
fully apply. Applicant may in the future be able to (re-)establish his eligibility for a security 
clearance. At present, however, security concerns raised by his problematic financial past 
remain.12 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:         Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
11 In order to mitigate security concerns raised by the accumulation of delinquent debt, an applicant is 
required to show a “meaningful track record” of debt repayment. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 
21, 2008). Applicant’s inconsistent and irregular payments over the past two years, some of which were 
timed at critical junctures in the current security clearance review, are not sufficient to meet the high level 
of proof required in these cases.  
 
12 In reaching this adverse decision, I considered Applicant’s military service and his overseas service as a 
contractor. However, these favorable whole-person matters are insufficient, whether considered individually 
or collectively with the other favorable record evidence, to mitigate the security concerns at issue. See 
generally AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.13 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 In light of Applicant’s work performance, unique language skills, and the obvious need of the military for 
persons with such skills, I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C. Arguably, a 
security clearance could be conditioned in this case on Applicant providing proof that: (a) he has 
rehabilitated his student loans, (b) he is repaying his debts, and (c) he remain financially stable. However, 
the applicability of this Appendix to contractor cases adjudicated under the Directive remains a question. 
Furthermore, even if applicable, no implementation guidance has yet been issued. Thus, it would be 
inappropriate for a judge to rule on this issue at this time.  
