 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01616 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                               Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) effective within 
the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, which revised and replaced the 2006 AGs and became 
effective for all decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied 
the newly revised AGs to this decision.1 
                                                          
1 Although I have applied the new AGs that became effective on June 8, 2017, to this decision, I have 
also considered the case under the previous AGs and my decision would be no different under either 
version.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM) on December 19, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on 
January 4, 2017, and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and 
she provided a detailed response to the FORM dated January 29, 2017, with 14 pages 
of attachments. The Government’s exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the five allegations in SOR and claimed that she was 
making payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.3 Applicant also claimed to have 
negotiated payments with the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, and she was in the 
process of negotiating payment with the creditors on SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. She was 
unable to make the minimum payments required, and late fees and interest accrued on 
her delinquent debts. The alleged delinquent debts total more than $47,000. No 
substantiating documents were provided initially to show payment plans, or compliance 
with payment plans. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
           .    
  Applicant is 55 years old. She obtained her associate’s degree in 1994. She 
never married and reports no military service. She has been employed by a federal 
contractor since September 2015. She reports having a security clearance in 2005. 
Applicant also stated in her Answer to the SOR that she was unemployed from January 
30, 2015 through September 8, 2015, and from December 2010 through May 2012, due 
to lay-offs or reductions in force.  
  
 Applicant disclosed one of her delinquent debts (SOR ¶ 1.c) in section 26 of her 
August 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions, also known as her security 
clearance application (SCA). Applicant claimed to have made a few payments of $100 
per month to this creditor in 2014 before the loan was sold in late 2014. She was not 
able to resume payments since late 2014 because she was unemployed. Now, attached 
to her Response to the FORM, she has produced evidence in the form of settlement 
agreements, e-mail confirmations of payments, and an acknowledgement of satisfaction 
of the sole judgment listed (SOR ¶ 1.c), showing that SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d have 
been paid in full or satisfied, albeit after the SOR was issued. She also attached a 
January 11, 2015 letter from a creditor showing that she entered into a payment 
agreement regarding SOR ¶ 1.e, and she has been making payments of $100 per 
month since January 2017 in accordance with that plan.  
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s August 21, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and her summary of clearance interview of January 20, 2016.  
 
3 GE 3, Answer to SOR.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted all five of the delinquent debts or judgments alleged in the 
SOR. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and    
 
 (d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant disclosed one of her delinquent debts in her SCA, and she has since 
contacted her creditors to make payment arrangements, satisfy the judgment, or pay off 
the delinquent debts. These delinquent debts resulted from her periods of 
unemployment that were beyond her control. Applicant produced evidence that she has 
followed through on her statements in her Answer to the SOR that she was negotiating 
payment plans. She provided a satisfaction of the judgment lien (SOR ¶ 1.c) and 
settlement agreements with confirmation of payments on the others (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.d). Therefore, she has mitigated the allegations in the SOR. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b) 
and 20(d) apply. I am satisfied that her delinquent debts have been or are being 
resolved.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s finances are no longer a security concern. She endured lay-offs and 
reductions in force by her employer. Since she has been re-employed there are ample 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a -1.e:             For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
          _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
 
 
