 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-02673 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 22, 2012 
(SCA-1), and another on June 2, 2014 (SCA-2). On September 12, 2016, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline E. The DOD 
CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006 (2006 AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 10, 2016, and December 6, 2016, and 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. On February 3, 2017, the 
Government sent a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) to Applicant, 
including documents identified as Items 1 through 9. He was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on February 15, 2017, and did not respond. Items 1 
through 3 are the pleadings in the case. Items 4 through 10 are admitted into evidence. 
 
2 
 
I admitted the attachments to Applicant’s SOR answer into evidence as Applicant 
Exhibits (AX) A through I, The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the FORM was completed. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 45, married his second wife in 2011. He does not have any 
children. He received his G.E.D. in 1990. He has worked for his current employer since 
2015. The DOD granted Applicant a security clearance in 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI offenses 
twice in 1992 and twice in 1998, with driving while his license was suspended or 
revoked twice in 1992 and once in 1999, and with violating his probation in 2004 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.h). It also alleged that Applicant failed to disclose his four DUI offenses 
on SCA-1 or SCA-2 (SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j), and that he falsified material facts about them 
during his 2014 and 2016 security clearance interviews (SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l). Applicant 
admitted each SOR allegation in his SOR answer.   
 
In 2012, Applicant signed SCA-1 certifying that the statements made therein 
were “true, complete, and correct to the best of [his] knowledge and belief and [were] 
made in good faith.” In 2014, he signed SCA-2 certifying same. The “Section 22 - Police 
Record” questions in SCA-1 and SCA-2, and Applicant’s responses thereto, are 
identical. He was interviewed twice in connection with SCA-2, in 2014 and 2016.4   
 
In “Section 22 - Police Record” of SCA-1 and SCA-2, Applicant answered “No” to 
the question of whether he had “EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol 
or drugs” and otherwise failed to report his four DUI offenses. In the “Additional 
Comments” section of SCA-1, he stated “I am a 100% law abiding American” and a 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from the SOR 
Answer (Item 3), SCA-1 (Item 4), and SCA-2 (Item 5). Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM 
and affirmatively waive any objection to the reports of his security clearance interviews (Item 6 through 8), 
I will consider only those facts contained therein that are not adverse to Applicant, unless they are 
contained in other evidence or based upon Applicant’s admissions in the SOR Answer. 
 
4 Item 4 through 7.  
 
3 
 
“straight laced . . . do the right thing US citizen.” In the “Additional Comments” section of 
SCA-2, he stated “I am a 100% law abiding American citizen” and a “do the right thing 
American.”5   
 
During his 2014 security clearance interview, he initially confirmed his “no” 
response to having ever been charged with a criminal offense involving alcohol. Then, 
after being confronted with his DUI history, Applicant admitted to only his May 1992 DUI 
offense, stated that he did not agree with any of the other DUI offenses, and then 
clarified that he has only ever received one DUI in his entire lifetime. He claimed that he 
did not list his May 1992 DUI offense on SCA-2 because it happened a long time ago 
and he did not realize that it was an “EVER” question.6  
 
During his 2016 security clearance interview, he provided details about his two 
1992 DUI offenses. Initially, he vehemently denied his two 1998 DUI offenses, and 
averred that perhaps the record was incorrect because he had never been arrested for 
DUI more than twice in his life. Then, after further questioning, he eventually admitted 
his two 1998 DUI offenses. He admitted that he lied about his number of DUI offenses 
on SCA-2, and during both his 2014 and 2016 security clearance interviews, because 
he was embarrassed that he had been arrested so many times.7  
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant acknowledged that his past criminal history 
resulted from “very poor choices” he made as a “very young man.”  He regrets “every 
single incident.” He blamed “some” of those choices on his tumultuous childhood. He 
attributed his lack of candor during the security clearance process to having a very hard 
time talking about his past and being embarrassed by it. He is “extremely embarrassed” 
and “very sorry” for his “actions.” Applicant averred that he is a “good person” and has 
“tried to put those 20+ years” in his past.  He further contended that his current wife has 
made him a “better man,” and put him “on the path of straight and narrow, period!” 
 
As a defense contractor, Applicant deployed to Kuwait to serve the U.S. Army 
between 2004 and 2005, and to Afghanistan between 2008 and 2013. For his service, 
he received a certificate of appreciation in 2011, and numerous coins.8 He has also 
been highly regarded for his work performance.9 
 
                                                          
5 Item 4 at 32-33, and 41; Item 5 at 33-34, and 41. 
 
6 Item 7 at 3-4. 
 
7 Item 6 at 3-4. 
 
8 AX A and E. 
 
9 AX B, C, and F through AX I. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”10 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”11 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”12 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.14 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”15 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
                                                          
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
11 Egan at 527. 
 
12 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
13 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
14 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.16 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.17 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.18 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”19 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”20 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
                                                          
16 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
17 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
18 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
20 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
Based on the uncontroverted SOR allegations and Applicant’s admissions to 
deliberately falsifying, concealing, and omitting material facts about his DUI history from 
SCA-1 and SCA-2 and during his 2014 and 2016 security clearance interviews, the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a 
national security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
 
Applicant’s pattern of criminal misconduct, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h, 
establishes the following additional disqualifying condition under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Applicant was between the ages of 19 and 26 when he was arrested for his four 
DUI offenses, and three “driving while license suspended or revoked” offenses. He was 
age 32 when arrested for his probation violation. These offenses collectively establish a 
pattern of questionable judgment that calls into question Applicant’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Nevertheless, given the time that has 
passed without the recurrence of similar offenses, he could have demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation were it not for his lack of candor about his DUI history during 
his security clearance investigations process. Based on all the evidence, Applicant has 
not demonstrated a sufficient pattern of modified behavior for me to conclude that his 
questionable judgment is behind him.  
 
While I considered the circumstances of his upbringing, service to the U.S. Army, 
especially as relates to his combat zone duty, and stellar work performance, they do not 
suffice to overcome the concerns under this guideline, especially as relates to his lack 
of candor during the security clearance process.  
 
 
7 
 
An applicant's completion of a security questionnaire is the initial step in 
requesting a security clearance and the investigative process is contingent upon the 
honesty of the applicant. Beginning with an applicant’s responses in the application, 
 
The security clearance investigation is not a forum for an applicant to split 
hairs or parse the truth narrowly. The Federal Government has a 
compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information. 
That compelling interest includes the government's legitimate interest in 
being able to make sound decisions (based on complete and accurate 
information) about who will be granted access to classified information. An 
applicant who deliberately fails to give full, frank, and candid answers to 
the government in connection with a security clearance investigation or 
adjudication interferes with the integrity of the industrial security 
program.21 
 
I have serious doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Neither of the potentially applicable mitigating conditions under this 
guideline applies.22  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 01-03132 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). 
 
22 AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts); and AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment). 
 
8 
 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his pattern of criminal misconduct, and his lack of candor about his 
DUI history on two security clearance applications and during two security clearance 
interviews. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.l: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
