 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02356 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on November 7, 2016, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on December 6, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 22, 2016. 
She responded to the FORM with documents that I have marked as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through D. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. The Government 
 
2 
 
exhibits included in the FORM and AE A through D are admitted in evidence without 
objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since October 2014. She has two associate’s degrees, which were 
awarded in 2004 and 2010. The most recent information available indicated that she 
was in the process of going through a divorce or divorced. She has a 16-year-old child.1 
  
Applicant has had several periods of unemployment and underemployment over 
the last 12 years, including unemployment from August 2010 to November 2010 and 
from April 2011 to April 2012. Applicant and her husband filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
case in July 2008. Her home was valued at $124,000, with $113,861 owed on the 
mortgage loan and $973 monthly payments. Under Schedule D, Creditors Holding 
Secured Claims, the petition listed $167,360 in claims. There were no claims under 
Schedule E, Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims. Under Schedule F, Creditors 
Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed debts totaling $49,435.2 
 
The bankruptcy plan called for $1,600 monthly payments to the trustee. Applicant 
and her husband were unable to maintain the payments during her periods of 
unemployment, and the case was dismissed in December 2011.3 
 
The SOR alleges the Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition; $34,817 owed on a 
mortgage loan; a $243 state tax lien; a $761 judgment to a medical creditor; 12 medical 
debts totaling $2,385; and 4 miscellaneous debts totaling $3,316. Applicant admitted 
owing all the debts at one point, but she stated and the evidence substantiates that 
several of the debts have been paid, settled, or otherwise resolved. All of the debts are 
listed on at least one credit report, except for the $156 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t, which 
is not listed on any credit report.4 
 
Applicant’s home was sold in a short sale. The August 2015 credit report lists the 
loan as $21,339 past due with a $34,817 balance. The July 2016 credit report lists the 
loan with a $0 balance. Applicant satisfied the $761 medical judgment in August 2011. 
She paid the state taxes, and the $243 state tax lien was released in November 2015.5 
 
Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of her bankruptcy. She 
reached out to the remaining creditors in an attempt to resolve her debts. She heard 
from a few of them and was working with them to arrive at a reasonable settlement or 
                                                          
1 Items 1-3. 
 
2 Items 1-3, 5, 6. 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 5, 6. 
 
4 Items 1-3, 5, 6. 
 
5 Items 1-3, 5, 6. 
 
3 
 
payment plan. She indicated that she will do the same with any creditors that respond to 
her.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 3; AE A-D.  
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
case; a defaulted mortgage loan, resulting in a foreclosure; a judgment; delinquent 
debts; and unpaid state taxes, resulting in a tax lien. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from unemployment and under-
employment, followed by the dissolution of her marriage. Applicant and her husband 
were not attempting to avoid paying their debts when they filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
case; they were attempting to pay their debts in a systematic plan approved by the 
court. Their $1,600 monthly payments were more than enough to pay the $973 
mortgage loan and other debts. Their “wage earner” case was dismissed after more 
than two years when Applicant lost her job. Since then, the mortgage loan was resolved 
through a short sale, the $761 medical judgment was satisfied in August 2011, and the 
state taxes were paid in November 2015. 
 
Applicant has reached out to the remaining creditors (12 medical debts totaling 
$2,385 and 4 miscellaneous debts totaling $3,316) attempting to resolve her debts. She 
heard from a few of them and was working with them to arrive at a reasonable 
settlement or payment plan. She indicated that she will do the same with any creditors 
that respond to her. Applicant established that she has a plan to resolve her financial 
problems, and she took significant action to implement that plan. Her financial issues 
are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
