1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-02060 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq.  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He failed to mitigate the security concerns stemming 
from his drug involvement and substance abuse, alcohol consumption, and personal 
conduct. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement and 
substance abuse), Guideline G (alcohol consumption), and Guideline E (personal 
conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2016, and requested a hearing 
to establish his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
                                                          
1  This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under 
2 
 
  
 On August 28, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant and a character witness testified, and the exhibits offered by the parties were 
admitted into the record without objection. (Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 4; Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A – G.) The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on September 6, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 54 years old, a college graduate, married (1994), and divorced (2000), 
with no children.2 At the time of the hearing, Applicant was engaged and due to be married 
on September 3, 2017.3 Since December 1994, he has been employed as an engineer  
by a defense contractor and has held a secret clearance since taking that employment.4 
 
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleged that from January 2012 through at least April 
2012, Applicant purchased and used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Under 
Guideline G, the SOR alleged that Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence 
on March 20, 2015, and on May 31, 2004. Under Guideline E, the SOR cross-pleaded 
the allegations under Guidelines H and G.5 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with 
explanations.6 
 
GUIDELINE H 
 
Applicant’s reasons for using marijuana in the January to April 2012 time frame 
are four-fold. First, he was suffering from recurring lower back pain, one that in the past 
had caused him to be hospitalized. He still often experiences back pain. Second, his 
mother had recently passed away. At the time, he and his mother were estranged, and 
she died before they were able to be reconciled. Third, he had recently purchased a 
house. Fourth, he and a neighbor had a disagreement that triggered a court proceeding 
against Applicant (which was dismissed). He purchased and used marijuana to help 
relieve the stress caused by those factors.7 
                                                          
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My Decision and 
Formal Findings under the revised Guidelines H, G, and E would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.  
 
 
 
2 GE 1, pp. 5, 10-11, 16; Tr., p. 18. 
 
3 Tr., p. 15.  
 
4 GE 1, pp. 11, 35. 
 
5 SOR ¶¶ 1.-3. 
  
6 Answer, pp. 1-8. The Answer includes ten enclosures numbered from one to ten. References to those 
enclosures will be cited as “Answer, Encl. #.” 
 
7 Answer, Encl. #2, p. 2. Tr., pp. 28-30, 60-63. AE C (chronology of Applicant’s back problems).  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant purchased the marijuana in 2012 from a family member of his then 
girlfriend. It was a one-time purchase, and he used it about twice a month for about four 
months at home in the evening but never at work. When using marijuana, he did consider 
that he could lose his clearance. Realizing that, he threw the marijuana away and has not 
used any since April 2012.8 Applicant’s Answer included a non-use affidavit.9 
 
During his February 2016 background interview, he told the investigator that he 
had purchased the marijuana from an unknown person at a party.10 At the hearing, 
Applicant admitted that he had not been completely accurate on that point during the 
interview. He obtained the marijuana from his ex-girlfriend’s sister’s husband not at a 
party.11  
 
GUIDELINE G  
 
On March 20, 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI). He was driving home from work and stopped at a restaurant 
about two to three miles from his home. He had three or four beers and a snack. He was 
convicted, his license was restricted for one year, and he was ordered to complete an 
alcohol safety program. Applicant paid his fines and completed the safety program.12  
  
On May 31, 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. He pled guilty to 
reckless driving, was fined, and received a 30-day suspended sentence. He had stopped 
at a local sports bar and had about four beers with friends. Because Applicant had not 
eaten anything, the beers had more of an effect on him.13 
 
At the hearing, Applicant was asked the following on direct examination:  
 
Q: So we have two drinking offenses. Do you think that you have an alcohol use 
problem? Has that been something that people have told you?  
 
A: So it’s been something that I’ve dealt with throughout my life. Okay. You look at 
these things and you say, well, he’s obviously got a problem…. 
 
                                                          
8 Tr., pp. 28-29, 31-34, 64.  
 
9 Answer, Encl. #10.  
 
10 GE 4, p. 4.  
 
11 Tr., pp. 31-32, 65-67.  
 
12 Answer, Encl. #2, p. 3. Tr., pp. 36-37.  
 
13 Answer, Encl. #2, p. 3. Tr., pp. 34-35.  
 
4 
 
Applicant testified that his decision to drive after consuming alcohol was “the wrong 
decision” 14 He characterized it as “lapsed judgment.”15 
 
APPLICANT’S CHARACTER  
 
Applicant’s fiancee’ testified on his behalf.  She has known him since late August 
2015. She is an intelligence analyst for another government agency and holds a top secret 
clearance. She is aware of the Government’s security concerns stated in the SOR. In her 
opinion, Applicant is hardworking, reliable, and trustworthy. Although Applicant may have 
a beer once or twice a week, she has never seen him drunk, or abuse alcohol, or engage 
in illegal drug use.16  
 
Applicant submitted character references. His employer characterized Applicant 
as dedicated, a high performer, and praised his excellent work. He has excellent 
performance evaluations, numerous awards, and service recognitions.17 Other 
references called him a top 10% student who exhibited perseverance, intelligence, 
commitment, and distinction.18  
 
APPLICANT’S MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE EVALUATION 
 
On advice of counsel, Applicant contacted a clinical psychologist for a mental 
health and substance abuse evaluation on October 6, 2016, after the SOR was issued on 
September 14, 2016 and before Applicant’s counsel filed the Answer to the SOR on 
November 3, 2016.19 The psychologist has his undergraduate degree and his doctorate 
from highly reputable schools, has been a practicing clinical psychologist for 39 years, is 
currently the director of a counseling center, and a professor in the Department of 
Psychiatry at a prestigious academic institution.20 
 
The psychologist interviewed Applicant twice in October 2016, and the following 
are pertinent observations, conclusions, and recommendations of the psychologist:21  
 
                                                          
14 Tr., pp. 35-37.  
 
15 AE A (Substance abuse overview).  
 
16 Tr., pp. 13-16.  
 
17 AE F (May 3, 2017 letter). This letter was not prepared in anticipation of the hearing. Answer, Encl. ##6-
8.  
 
18 AE F (September 7, 1989 and September 13, 1988 letters). AE G.   
 
19 Tr., p. 56. AE A.  
 
20 AE A.  
 
21 AE A.  
 
5 
 
ˉ Applicant has on a few occasions in the past shown a vulnerability to alcohol and 
marijuana use particularly when under stress.  
 
ˉ In light of that vulnerability, Applicant is willing to make changes prescribed by 
the psychologist. 
  
ˉ Given Applicant’s past history of substance abuse issues, the psychologist 
recommended that Applicant completely abstain from the use of alcohol, and any other 
potential drug of abuse.22 
 
ˉ The psychologist also recommended that Applicant consider engaging in 
counseling periodically, particularly at times of increased stress and/or as a preventative 
measure to fortify himself with respect to stressors that may arise from time to time.  
 
ˉ The psychologist is of the opinion that Applicant has good potential to continue 
making worthy contributions to his employer]…. 
 
ˉ The psychologist is also of the opinion that Applicant does not have a mental 
health condition which would present a threat to security. 
 
Applicant’s psychologist provided a follow-up evaluation report dated August 3, 
2017 with the following pertinent observations:23 
 
ˉ Applicant has engaged in a consistent course of counseling and regularly attends 
reliably attends sessions every other week since October 2016. 
 
ˉ  No alcohol-related issues have emerged, and [Applicant] has been abstinent 
from all illegal drugs. 
 
ˉ  The psychologist is impressed with Applicant’s progress.   
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
                                                          
22 The psychologist noted that in Applicant’s teenage years and at about age 20, he underwent inpatient 
treatment for illegal substance use. AE A (Substance abuse overview). Tr., pp. 45-48.  
 
23 AE B.  
6 
 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
 Under AG H for drug use,24 suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put 
into doubt because drug use can both impair judgment and raise questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to with laws, rules and regulations: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
                                                          
24 AG ¶¶ 24, 25 and 26 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
 
7 
 
substance means any "controlled substance" as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe any 
of the behaviors listed above. 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including…purchase…; and 
 
 (f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information.  
 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and, 
   
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited 
to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and, (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
Applicant admitted his use of marijuana from January 2012 until April 2012, and 
that his use occurred while he held a security clearance. Facts admitted by an applicant 
in an answer to a Statement of Reasons require no further proof by the Government.25 
Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance, and its possession is regulated by the 
federal government under the Controlled Substances Act.26 In an October 25, 2014, 
memorandum, the Director of National Intelligence reaffirmed that the use of marijuana is 
                                                          
25 ISCR Case No. 94-1159 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 1995) (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR 
allegations . . . relieve Department Counsel of its burden of proof”); ISCR Case No. 94-0569 at 4 and n.1 
(App. Bd. Mar. 30, 1995) (“[a]n applicant’s admissions, whether testimonial or written, can provide a legal 
basis for an Administrative Judge’s findings”).   
 
26 21 U.S.C. § 811 et seq.   
- 
8 
 
relevant to national security determinations, regardless of changes to state laws 
concerning marijuana use.27 AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (f) apply. 
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions cited above and find that they do not 
apply. First, the 2012 use of marijuana while holding a clearance is not so long ago as to 
negate security concerns. Second, Applicant’s use of marijuana must be viewed as a part 
of a larger picture, which includes a consideration of Applicant’s abuse of alcohol, 
discussed below, which requires a lengthier period of abstinence to mitigate security 
concerns-.28 The picture that emerges of Applicant is a hard-working, conscientious, and 
dedicated employee with an exemplary professional record. What the record also shows 
is an individual who in times of stress can be vulnerable to the use of drugs or alcohol to 
alleviate that stress. This is borne out by the 2004 DUI, the 2012 use of marijuana for 
about four months, and the 2015 DUI.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder;  
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
 (d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
                                                          
27 James R. Clapper, Director of National Intelligence, Memorandum: Adherence to Federal Laws 
Prohibiting Marijuana Use (October 25, 2014). See also http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml. 
 
28 The Appeal Board often reminds us that we should not evaluate the evidence in a piecemeal fashion. 
ISCR Case No. 11-01888 at 6 (App. Bd. Jun. 1, 2012). Rather, we must evaluate the record as a whole. 
ISCR Case No. 14-03526 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 31, 2015). 
 
9 
 
 Applicant’s DUIs in 2004 and 2015 raise a security concern under AG ¶ 22(a).29 
 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance 
with treatment recommendations; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.30 
 
Applicant’s latest alcohol-related incident was in 2015, just over two years ago. 
And although Applicant sought treatment, he did so only after the SOR was issued, and 
he has been in the treatment program for just about one year.31  At the hearing, Applicant 
explained that he has struggled with alcohol abuse problems all of his life. At this point, 
Applicant needs more of a track record of abstinence and sobriety to mitigate the 
concerns. Thus, I cannot conclude that so much time has passed to trigger AG ¶ 23(a) or 
that AG ¶ 23(b) or (c) apply. 32 
 
 
                                                          
29 Although there is no evidence of habitual or binge alcohol use, Applicant himself testified that driving 
under the circumstances in 2004 and 2015 was not wise, and he told his psychologist that it was an example 
of “lapsed judgment.” And although his psychologist made no diagnosis of an alcohol use disorder, he did 
recommend that Applicant completely abstain from the use of alcohol. The point is that AG ¶¶ 22(c) and (d) 
are partially triggered.  
 
30 Although I have given Applicant’s substance abuse as a youth very little weight, it is sufficient to preclude 
the application of AG ¶ 23(c).  
 
31 As noted in the Findings of Fact, Applicant’s psychologist expressed the following: “Applicant has good 
potential to continue making a worthy contribution to the work of [Applicant’s employer]….” During closing 
argument, I asked Applicant’s counsel if this was a medical opinion or if the psychologist had moved to the 
realm of opining about Applicant’s ability to make worthy contributions to a defense contract. Tr., p. 79. 
Counsel responded that he did not believe that statement was a medical opinion. Tr., pp. 79-80. I agree 
and, therefore, I have given that particular statement no weight.   
 
32 Based on Applicant’s testimony and his psychologist’s evaluations, Applicant has embarked on a 
program that if successfully adhered to as recommended would make him a worthy candidate for re-
application for a security clearance.  
 
10 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 As noted in the Findings of Fact, Applicant testified that he did not accurately 
answer the background interviewer’s question as to how he acquired the marijuana. He 
told the interviewer that he purchased it from an unknown person at a party. In fact, he 
testified, he got it from his ex-girlfriend’s sister’s husband and not at a party. During 
closing argument, Department Counsel argued that this was a blatant misstatement to 
the interviewer.33 I asked Department Counsel if this was a material misrepresentation. 
She replied that it was material, but since there already was a Guideline E count, I could 
consider it relevant to my analysis of that count and the whole-person concept, without 
the need to amend the SOR.34 
 
 This warrants some discussion. Although the distinction might be a fine one, there 
is a difference between “relevant” evidence and “material’ evidence. Relevant evidence 
is “evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of any 
consequence to the determination of an action more probable or less probable….”35 
“Material evidence” is evidence “that has [a] significant relationship with the facts or issues 
of a case…and can affect its conclusion or outcome.”36 Thus, the test for relevant 
evidence is more sweeping than the test for material evidence, the latter of which must 
affect the outcome or be outcome determinative. Applicant’s misrepresentation is relevant 
to the whole-person concept, but it is not material, because it does not affect the outcome 
of my analysis under Guideline E. I rule against Applicant under Guideline E because of 
my rulings under Guidelines H and G.37   
 
Conclusion 
 
The record raises doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.38 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
33 Tr., p. 71. 
 
34 Tr., pp. 81-82.  
 
35 Fed. R. Evid. 401.  
 
36 www.businessdictionary.com/definition/material-evidence.html.  
 
37 Since Department Counsel did not amend the SOR to allege Applicant’s mischaracterization, I can only 
use that non-alleged conduct for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and credibility. 
ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017).   
 
38 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):                 Against Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:        Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)     Against Applicant 
 
     Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:        Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 3, (Personal Conduct)        Against Applicant 
 
               Subparagraph 3.a:                             Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
