1 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )          ISCR Case No. 16-02012 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement and substance misuse) or Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written 
record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
on January 26, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on February 1, 2017, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a three-page 
response to the FORM, which included an amended answer to the SOR and a character 
reference letter attached (Response). The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 
through 5, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017.  
2 
 
 
In section III of the Government’s FORM, Department Counsel amended the SOR 
in order to conform to the record evidence by adding paragraph 2 under Guideline E 
(personal conduct) and subparagraph 2.a to state:  
 
You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing certified by you on January 16, 2009, in response to “Section 24, Your illegal 
use of drugs or drug activity. . . .” Applicant admitted the allegation of deliberate 
falsification contained in the amendment at SOR ¶ 2.a and initialed beside his answer.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 29 years old. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 2010, and has been 
employed as a researcher by a federal contractor since June 2012. Applicant reports no 
military service, and he has never married. Applicant has held a previous security 
clearance since April 2009.   
 
In May 27, 2015, Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SCA),2 
and in section 23 (illegal drug use) he disclosed his repeated use of various illegal drugs 
while he possessed a security clearance.3 He also disclosed that he had been arrested 
in November 2006 for possession of drug paraphernalia and he was found guilty, but this 
conviction was later expunged in December 2006. Applicant became the subject of an 
internal investigation after his employer supposedly received an anonymous tip that he 
was using illegal drugs. When he was called in by an investigator for the company on 
April 9, 2015, he admitted to his long-term use of marijuana (MJ) and a variety of other 
illegal drugs. The illegal drugs, and prescription pharmaceuticals that Applicant admitted 
to using, which include MDMA, acid, cocaine, OxyContin, psychedelic mushrooms, 
opium-suboxyn, and Adderall, are listed in the JPAS entries made in April 2015.4 
Applicant corroborated this extensive illegal drug use in his Answer to the SOR and his 
clearance interview.5  
 
In his response to the FORM and his Answer to the SOR dated December 22, 
2016, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i, with 
explanations. He also admitted to the deliberate falsification on section 24 of his January 
16, 2009 SCA.6 In his response to SOR ¶ 1.a, he stated “I affirm. I intend to use marijuana 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 27, 2015 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3) and his summary of clearance interview by a background investigator 
dated March 8, 2016 (Item 4).  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 5. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 2. 
3 
 
in the future when I am legally and contractually able to.” In SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, he 
responded “I affirm. Only LSD and mushrooms” (¶1.b) and “only cocaine” (¶1.c). In 
response to SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e, he clarified that it was “only Adderall and MDMA (molly)” 
and “only opium” (SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant elaborated in his Answer to the SOR that much 
of his substance abuse was while he held a security clearance, which he understood was 
against the rules. Further, he was reprimanded by his employer and he took a substance-
abuse course and counseling from May to June 2015. Through counseling, he learned 
that he is self-medicating for anxiety. He wanted to be honest and say, “I would use 
marijuana in the future, but only if federally legalized . . . to cope with my anxiety.”7 In his 
clearance interview in March 2016, he stated that he last used MJ with his brother, around 
the holiday season in late 2015, after he had been reprimanded and completed a 
substance abuse course.   
 
In regard to the Amendment to the SOR at section III of the FORM, Applicant 
admitted the allegation that he deliberately falsified section 24 of his earlier, January 2009 
SCA, by only identifying MJ and claiming to have used it only “from 08/2006 to 11/2007 . 
. . during my freshman year in college . . . I have not used it since and have no intention 
of using it again.”8 In fact, as he has now admitted, Applicant had engaged in pervasive 
and long-term, illegal-drug use, and he used MJ about three to five times a week after 
completing his 2009 SCA. In his clearance interview in March 2016, Applicant stated that 
he has used MJ less than 12 times since his security clearance was suspended or 
revoked in 2015. He also added that he not only intentionally provided false information 
about his illegal drug use on his 2009 SCA, but he also lied about that drug use to the 
clearance investigator in 2009. He told that investigator that he had stopped using MJ, 
when in fact, he was still using it.9  
 
In his March 2016 clearance interview, Applicant also stated that he had never 
been drug tested by his employer and he has not been diagnosed as addicted to or 
dependent on narcotics. Applicant attached a letter dated December 20, 2016, from a 
senior research engineer at his employer, stating that Applicant is a key employee of the 
federal contractor and “he has shown to be trustworthy and diligent in maintaining and 
adhering to security guidelines and regulations.”10 
 
                                           Policies 
 
 DOD took action in this case under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
                                                          
 
7 Response to Form. 
 
8 Item 2, section 26. 
 
9 Item 4, p. 7. 
 
10 Response to Form – attachment.  
4 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017.11 Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing 
of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
11 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
5 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
          The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG  
¶ 24:   
 
 The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription and 
non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause physical or 
mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended 
purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, 
both because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled 
substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
          The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
 ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and  
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse.  
 
                 Applicant used marijuana and other illegal drugs while holding a security 
clearance. He also expressed an intent to continue using marijuana in the future to treat 
his anxiety, under certain circumstances. The above disqualifying conditions are 
applicable. 
 
6 
 
            AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
           (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
           (b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
      (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
     (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
     (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
                                                    
              Applicant has continued to use MJ as recently as December 2015, even after he 
was reprimanded for illegal drug use and lost his security clearance. He has not abstained 
and appears to be philosophically opposed to current federal drug laws. In addition to MJ, 
he used an assortment of other illegal or unprescribed drugs, including OxyContin, 
cocaine and Adderall. He has now admitted to deliberately failing to disclose this illegal 
drug use on his 2009 SCA. He provided no evidence of completion of a substance abuse- 
course or rehabilitation or a favorable prognosis from a medical professional. Moreover, 
he seems recalcitrant and bent on continuing his illegal drug use in the future under 
certain circumstances. He was candid in stating that he may continue to use MJ to treat 
his anxiety if it is legalized. 
 
          Applicant appears to be sincere, but that is insufficient to mitigate the well-
established pattern of illegal drug use. His conduct continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable, and AG ¶ 
26(b) is partially applicable.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure 
to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following normally will result in 
7 
 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or 
polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, while 
legal there, is illegal in the United States; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the 
employer as a condition of employment. 
 
8 
 
 Applicant has admitted to falsifying the 2009 SCA about the extent and duration 
of his illegal drug use, and he lied to the OPM clearance interview investigator about it. 
AG ¶ 16 (a) and (b) apply and the focus shifts to a determination of which, if any of the 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
  Conditions that could potent ia l l y mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
My analysis above under administrative guideline H is the same under this 
this administrative guideline E and is herein incorporated by reference. Applicant  
deliberately falsified his 2009 SCA and later lied in the clearance interview about 
his drug use. He claims to have completed a substance-abuse course and had  
counselling, but he produced no evidence.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
9 
 
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has worked over five years for a 
federal contractor directly supporting DOD’s mission and he is a key employee. He has 
completed a substance-abuse course and counseling. Most importantly, Applicant did not 
disclose the specific security violations alleged in the SOR on his 2009 SCA, and he has 
not unequivocally declared his intention to refrain from further use of illegal drugs. He has 
not met his burden of persuasion.  
 
Applicant’s drug involvement and substance misuse remain a security concern. 
These offenses were not minor or infrequent, and they were not committed under such 
unusual circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant has acknowledged the egregiousness of his drug involvement or 
taken steps to alleviate the stressors or circumstances that contributed his behavior to 
insure that it does not recur. He has not met his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guidelines H and E.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:               Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
