 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01936 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F and B. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
2 
 
 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 15, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-7 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information, and Item 8 is a request for administrative notice on South 
Korea). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on November 28, 2016. 
Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections and did not submit any 
evidence. Items 3-7 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
  
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to South Korea. Applicant did not object and the request was 
approved. The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence 
but were included in the record as Item 8. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a – 
2.c, and 2.e. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.d. The admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
The SOR alleged Applicant failed to file his tax year 2011-2013 federal income 
tax returns; that he is delinquent on paying a judgment of $1,200, entered in 2009; and 
he is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $185 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c). The 
SOR also alleged his wife, parents, parents-in-law, two sisters-in-law and two brothers-
in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea; and that he and his wife maintain 
several bank accounts, own stock, and insurance policies in South Korea (SOR ¶¶ 2.a- 
2.e).  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He was born in South Korea in 1972. He relocated to 
the United States with his family in 1986. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1991. 
Presumably, he attended high school and college in the United States, but the record is 
silent as to that information. He began working for a series of defense contractors in 
2002 to the present as an IT specialist or engineer. He has continuously lived in South 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Korea since at least 2002. The record contains no evidence that Applicant has property 
or other assets in the United States.2 He married a South Korean national in 2004. He 
has two children who are U.S. citizens, but both were born in South Korea.3   
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a South Korean citizen and currently resides there as well. 
Applicant and his wife share the same residence. She is a retired customer service 
representative. She has no ties to the South Korean government. Applicant claims his 
wife intends to seek U.S. citizenship when they return to the United States.4 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of South Korea. His 
mother is 76 years old and is a retired school teacher. His father is 78 years old. He is 
retired from self-employment. Applicant has daily contact with his parents, both in 
person and telephonic. Neither parent has ties to the South Korean government.5 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of South 
Korea. His mother-in-law is 76 years old and is a homemaker. His father-in-law is 77 
years old. He is retired from a government position. Applicant has monthly contact with 
his in-laws, both in person and telephonic. His father-in-law used to work for the South 
Korean government as a customer service associate. His mother-in-law has no ties to 
the South Korean government.6 
 
 Applicant has two brothers-in-law (B1, B2) and two sisters-in-law (S1, S2) that 
are citizens and residents of South Korea.7 B1 is 54 years old. He is an engineer for an 
auto company. S1 is 51 years old. She is a homemaker. B2 is 49 years old. He works in 
marketing. S2 is 47 years old. She is a school administrator. Applicant has in-person 
contact with these four in-laws approximately six times a year. None have any 
affiliations with the South Korean government.8  
                                                          
2 Item 4 (credit report shows he once had a mortgage loan and a car loan, but both accounts are closed). 
 
3 Items 3, 5. 
 
4 Items 2, 5. 
 
5 Items 2, 5. 
 
6 Items 2, 5. 
 
7 Applicant admitted in a September 17, 2014, background interview that he had two brothers-in-law and 
two sisters-in-law. He went on to describe biographical information for all four people. In his SOR Answer 
(Item 2), he claimed he only had one brother-in-law and one sister-in-law. There is no further explanation 
for this discrepancy in the record. I find that there are two brothers-in-law and two-sisters-in-law. Items 2, 
5. 
 
8 Items 2, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant and his wife have opened up numerous bank savings accounts, bought 
insurance, and purchased stock in South Korea. These transactions took place from 
1994 to 2010. The bank savings balances approximate $49,000; insurance purchases 
approximate $50,000; stock purchase approximate $499. There is no record evidence 
indicating Applicant divested himself of any of these assets. There also is no evidence 
indicating Applicant’s asset holdings in the United States.9 
 
South Korea 
 
 South Korea is one of seven counties most actively engaging in foreign economic 
collection and industrial espionage against the United States. South Korea has been an 
unauthorized recipient of dual-use technologies. Industrial espionage remains a high-
profile concern relating to South Korea and South Korean companies. 
 
 The South Korean government has generally respected the human rights of its 
citizens. The South Korean National Security Law grants authorities the power to detain, 
arrest, and imprison persons believed to have committed acts to endanger the security 
of the state.10 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant admitted failing to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2011-
2013. A credit report from June 2014, establishes the unpaid judgment and delinquent 
debt. In his May 2014 security clearance application, he stated the reason for his failure 
to file his tax returns was: for 2011 return—missing W-2 form and interest form due to 
change of company and change of address; for 2012—missing documents due to 
change of company and address; for 2013—seeking an extension. He also claimed he 
was working with a professional to address the problem. In his Answer, he admitted he 
still had not filed these returns and was “working to fix the issue.” In April 2016, 
Applicant supplied IRS account transcripts for his tax years 2011-2013, which showed 
that no return had been filed for any of those years. There is no other record evidence 
indicating those tax returns were filed. Applicant’s tax issue is unresolved.11 
 
 Applicant claimed that he “wired the final payment on 31 May,” to pay the 
judgment. He failed to produce documentation to support his assertion. Applicant 
denied the collection debt for $185, claiming he did not know the creditor. He failed to 
produce documentation supporting his dispute. His debts are not resolved.12 
 
 
                                                          
9 Items 2, 5. 
 
10 Item 8. 
 
11 Items 2-4, 7. 
 
12 Items 2, 4. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;   
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s wife, parents, and in-laws are all citizens and residents of South 
Korea. Applicant and his wife have substantial financial holdings in South Korea. South 
Korea is one of the world’s most aggressive nations in the collection of sensitive 
economic information. These factors create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
 
7 
 
 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. The same situation also creates a 
potential conflict of interest for Applicant. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e), and 7(f) have been 
raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Based upon the documented action of South Korea in attempting to gain 
sensitive economic information from U.S. sources, the evidence does not support that it 
is unlikely that Applicant could be placed in a position to choose between the interests 
of his family in South Korea and those of the United States. Although Applicant has 
some ties to the United States, his ties to South Korea appear stronger. He has not 
resided in the United States since 2002, and there is no evidence of U.S.-held assets, 
which is contrasted to his documented $100,000 worth of South Korean assets. He 
failed to file his federal tax returns for at least three years. It is difficult to determine 
based upon the evidence that he has a deep and longstanding relationship with the 
United States such that he would resolve all conflicts in favor of the United States. As 
stated above, the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration and 
any doubt must be resolved in favor of national security. I am unable to find any of the 
mitigating conditions to be fully applicable. Despite the presence of some mitigation, it is 
insufficient to overcome the significant security concerns that exist.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
8 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
trustworthiness concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, 
including espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for years 2011-2013. He 
incurred a judgment in 2009 that remains unpaid. He failed to pay a collection debt. I 
find all the above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 
9 
 
 
The record contains no documentation supporting Applicant’s assertion that he 
filed his 2011-2013 federal tax returns. He also failed to document his payoff of the 
judgment. There is also no documentary evidence supporting a dispute of the collection 
debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
South Korea has an aggressive espionage program aimed at the United States. 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. There is no reason 
to question Applicant’s loyalty and devotion to this country. However, he has not 
overcome the vulnerability to pressure, coercion, exploitation, and duress created by his 
relatives living in South Korea.  
 
 Applicant failed to produce any evidence showing that he has taken appropriate 
action to deal with his financial issues. He has done nothing whatsoever to question his 
loyalty and devotion to this country. However, he has simply been unable to overcome 
the heavy burden of showing that he is not subject to influence by South Korea. His 
vulnerability to foreign pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress remains a concern.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
