 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 16-00531 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant disclosed his three alcohol-related incidents in his 2015 SCA. He 
learned from his mistakes, has matured, and is now a more responsible adult who 
consumes alcohol in moderation. He has not been involved in any additional alcohol-
related misconduct since January 2015. The record evidence supports a determination 
of increased maturity, reliability, and trustworthiness. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 17, 
2015. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 
31, 2016, alleging security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2016, and requested a decision based on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
September 16, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on October 12, 2016. He was 
 
2 
 
 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 
2017. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and I admitted the proffered FORM 
evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the three SOR allegations. His SOR admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 2007, and received his bachelor’s degree in May 2011. He has never 
been married and has no children.  
 
Applicant’s employment history indicates that he has been working, mostly part 
time, since he was in high school. After graduating from college, he worked for a private 
company from October 2011 to February 2015. His current employer and clearance 
sponsor hired Applicant in February 2015. He has been fully employed since.  
 
In his response to Section 22 (Police Record) of his 2015 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he was arrested in July 2008, and charged with underage possession of 
alcohol and public intoxication. He was found guilty of public intoxication and sentenced 
to six-months’ probation and to perform community service. The underage possession 
of alcohol charge was dismissed. Applicant was 18 at the time of his arrest. 
 
In April 2009, Applicant was charged with possession of alcohol under 21, 
littering, and obstructing justice. He was on his college campus’ lawn drinking beer with 
friends. College security officers approached him, and he threw away the beer can. 
Applicant received a ticket that required him to appear in court. He was found guilty of 
possession of alcohol under 21. He was sentenced to six months of probation and 50-
hours of community service. 
 
In January 2015, police officers observed Applicant swaying while walking out of 
a bar. He was arrested, spent the night in jail, and was release the next morning on his 
own recognizance. He was charged with drunk in public, and paid a $100 fine. 
 
In October 2015, a government investigator interviewed Applicant concerning the 
above alcohol-related incidents. Applicant told the investigator that he was currently 
drinking four beers once a week with friends. It takes four beers for Applicant to become 
intoxicated, and he was drinking to intoxication once a week. He stated he intended to 
continue his current alcohol consumption or maybe decrease his alcohol use. 
 
In May 2016, Applicant answered a set of DOHA interrogatories. He indicated his 
alcoholic beverage of choice was beer. He was consuming beer twice a week, and he 
intended to continue doing so in the future. Applicant had not participated in any alcohol 
 
3 
 
 
rehabilitation program or alcohol-support group. There is no evidence to show Applicant 
has been involved in any additional alcohol-related misconduct since January 2015. 
 
Applicant believes the 2008 and 2009 alcohol-related incidents should be 
considered as isolated incidents caused by his young age (he was a minor) and 
inexperience. He believes that he has matured, learned from his mistakes, and is now a 
responsible adult who consumes alcohol in moderation. As evidence of his maturity, he 
noted his stable employment, the purchase of his home, and that he has not been 
involved in any alcohol-related misconduct since January 2015. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the AG implemented by SEAD 4 in June 2017. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
4 
 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 articulates the security concern relating to alcohol consumption:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness  
 
Between 2008 and January 2015, Applicant was involved in three alcohol-related 
incidents that resulted in law enforcement intervention. AG ¶ 22 provides a disqualifying 
condition that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, 
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, 
regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol use or whether the individual has 
been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder.” The record established the above 
disqualifying condition, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Two mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Both AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply. The 2008 and 2009 alcohol-related incidents 
happened when Applicant was a minor attending college. There were no more issues of 
concern until six years later when he was found guilty of drunk in public. There is no 
additional evidence of any alcohol-related incidents or issues of concern since January 
2015. It has been almost three years since Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident. 
 
Applicant disclosed his alcohol-related incidents in his 2015 SCA and admitted 
his mistakes. He has learned from his mistakes, has matured, and is now a more 
responsible adult who consumes alcohol in moderation. Applicant’s stable employment, 
the purchase of his home, and having no involvement in any additional alcohol-related 
misconduct since January 2015 support a determination of increased maturity, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He presented 
sufficient evidence of responsible consumption of alcohol to dispel reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment concerns. The alcohol consumption security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
6 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
