 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01463 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about her financial problems and 
falsifications. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on 
July 21, 2016, and she elected a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
August 16, 2016, Department Counsel submitted his file of relevant material (FORM) and 
provided a complete copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on August 22, 2016. 
She was afforded an opportunity to respond within 30 days of its receipt and to file 
objections to and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On September 11, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that although the 
SOR referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006, I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 
2017, pursuant to Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4). I also permitted the 
parties to supplement the record with additional evidence and argument. Both parties 
received my order, and neither party raised an objection nor submitted additional 
documents.2 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-11.3 FORM Item 3 
is an unauthenticated summary of an interview with a government investigator conducted 
on January 6, 2016. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that she could 
object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or that she could make corrections, 
additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate.  Applicant was 
informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could  
constitute a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by me. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM or file any objections. Given Department Counsel’s advisement and 
Applicant’s work experience, I find her waiver to be knowing and intelligent.4 FORM Items 
2-11 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 2-11, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges  seven delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.g.) and three deliberate 
falsifications on Applicant’s November 2015 security questionnaire (SOR ¶¶ 2.a.-2.c.). In 
her response to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 64 years old. Since March 1978, she has been employed part time as 
a shipping inspector by a DOD contractor. She was married in 1970 and divorced in 1990. 
She has a 31-year-old son, with whom she resides.5 
 
 In April 2016, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, listing liabilities 
totaling approximately $85,000. This petition includes the eight alleged debts, which 
became delinquent between March 2011 and September 2013. The bankruptcy plan was 
confirmed in July 2016, but there is no evidence of any payments in accordance with the 
bankruptcy plan or that Applicant has completed the requisite financial counseling. 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I.  
 
3 FORM Item 1 consists of the the SOR and Applicant’s answer, which are pleadings and are included in 
the administrative record. 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
Moreover, there is no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts prior to the 
bankruptcy filing.6  
 
 During her January 2016 security interview, Applicant’s explanation as to the 
cause of her financial problems lacked clarity. She both stated that she lived within her 
means but also that her financial problems were caused by her low income. She has 
provided no further information about her monthly income and expenses, any debt-
resolution efforts, any circumstances beyond her control that contributed to her financial 
problems, and whether she has sought to supplement her part-time employment.7 
 
 In 1984, Applicant was charged with and convicted of driving under the influence 
(DUI). She was sentenced to two years of probation. In 1986, she was charged with two 
felony drug possession charges, and she was placed on probation for six years.8  
 
 Applicant omitted her criminal conduct or financial delinquencies on her November 
2015 security clearance application (SCA). She responded “NO” to the following 
questions: 
 
Section 22 – Police Record 
 
Have you EVER been charged with a felony offense? 
 
Have you EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs? 
 
Section 26 – Financial Record 
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had bill or debts turned over to a 
collection agency?   
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? 
 
She omitted the aforementioned seven debts, which were charged off or placed for 
collection between 2011 and 2013. She also omitted the two felony drug offenses and the 
DUI. In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three charges. During her 
January 2016 security interview, Applicant voluntarily disclosed the DUI and drug charges 
and explained that she had forgotten about them due to the passage of time. Applicant 
initially denied any delinquent accounts, but later admitted that she was aware that she 
had past-due accounts when confronted. Applicant has not provided any explanation for 
her omission of her delinquent debts on the November 2015 SCA.9 
                                                          
6 GE 4-8. 
 
7 GE 3-5. 
 
8 GE 3; GE 9-11. 
 
9 Response to SOR; GE 2; GE 3. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 
5 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s  seven delinquent debts total approximately $30,439. These debts 
became delinquent between 2011 and 2013, and they remain delinquent. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a), and 19(c). Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts have remained delinquent for several years. There is 
no evidence of any debt-resolution efforts or evidence demonstrating Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.   
 
6 
 
 
During her January 2016 security interview, Applicant identified no circumstances 
beyond her control that contributed to her financial problems, though she alluded to 
having insufficient income. She provided no further information as to whether she has 
sought to supplement her part-time employment. More importantly, there is no 
documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts prior to her April 2016 bankruptcy 
filing or that she has adhered to payments in accordance with the bankruptcy plan. AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has sought credit counseling. Nor is there 
evidence of her monthly income or expenses to establish that her financial problems are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”10 
Although Applicant has filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, there is no documentary evidence 
that she has adhered to the payment plan. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s  seven delinquent debts are included in her Chapter 13 bankruptcy; 
however, there is no documentary evidence that she has made any payments in 
accordance with the bankruptcy plan. Beyond the bankruptcy filing, there is no 
documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts nor evidence demonstrating 
Applicant’s financial responsibility. I find that Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status,  determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
7 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified her responses to Sections 26 
(SOR ¶ 2.a.) and 22 (SOR ¶¶ 2.b.-2.c.) on her November 2015 SCA. During her January 
2016 security interview, Applicant admitted that she was aware that she had delinquent 
debts, and she has not provided an explanation as to why she omitted these delinquent 
accounts on her security questionnaire. The Government established that Applicant 
deliberately falsified her responses to Section 26 (SOR ¶ 2.a.). AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR 
¶ 2.a. 
 
 Applicant omitted her criminal charges from over 30 years ago, in response to 
Section 22 (SOR ¶¶ 2.b.-2.c.). During her security interview, Applicant voluntarily 
disclosed this information when questioned by the OPM investigator and explained that 
she had forgotten these aged charges. Because the charges are over 30 years old and 
Applicant later volunteered this information, I find her explanation credible. AG ¶ 16(a) 
does not apply to SOR ¶¶ 2.b.-2.c. 
 
 The following mitigating condition is potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts. 
 
 Applicant did not make prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omissions about 
her delinquent debts.  Rather, she denied any delinquent debts when initially questioned 
by the OPM investigator. Only after she was confronted by the OPM investigator with her 
delinquent accounts did she admit that she was aware that she had delinquent debts. AG 
¶ 17(a) does not apply. Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security 
concerns arising from these falsifications. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
 
8 
 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E and 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant incurred approximately $30,000 in delinquent debts between 2011 and 
2013, and she was aware of her financial delinquencies. She deliberately omitted her 
delinquent debts on her SCA. Beyond her bankruptcy filing, she has failed to provide any 
documentary evidence of any payments under the bankruptcy, any debt-resolution efforts 
outside of bankruptcy, or that she has acted responsibly with her finances. I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.b.-2.c.:   For Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.11 Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 See SEAD 4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(c). 
