 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03999 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to revoke his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant has resolved all of the SOR accounts. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 24, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government served Applicant with its written case against him, called a file of relevant 
material (FORM), and a copy of the Directive on May 27, 2017. He received the FORM 
and provided a response. The items appended to the FORM and Applicant’s response 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant has worked for federal contracting companies since 2006. He has 
worked for his current employer since February 2012. He completed his most recent 
security clearance application in September 2012 and disclosed some delinquent 
accounts. Applicant’s background investigation confirmed his financial problems. The 
SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he owed $10,000 in delinquent accounts, of 
which $8,800 was for two state tax liens.  
 
 Applicant held a security clearance during his service in the U.S. Army between 
1977 and 1997. Applicant and his wife married in 1996. After separating from the Army, 
Applicant worked and lived in the same city as his family. Applicant began living and 
working overseas for federal contracting companies in 2006. It is unclear if he was 
granted access to classified information when he began working with a federal 
contracting company. With the exception of six months of unemployment between 2009 
and 2010, Applicant has worked on contracts in the Middle East and South Asia. 
Applicant’s wife maintained responsibility for the household finances and the couple’s 
four children. Applicant claims that he unaware that his wife mismanaged the family 
finances until January 2010 when he returned home to discover that the family home 
was lost in foreclosure.  
 
 In April 2017, Applicant paid all of the alleged accounts. Although he did not 
elaborate, Applicant claims that he has a plan in place to prevent similar financial 
problems in the future. The most recent credit report in the record shows that, aside 
from the alleged accounts, Applicant has a favorable credit history. 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgement, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.3 The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case that 
Applicant demonstrated a history of not meeting his financial obligations.4 However, 
there is sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has resolved all 
of the alleged accounts, showing a good-faith effort to repay his delinquent accounts.5   
 
Based on the record, Applicant remains a suitable candidate for continued 
access to classified information. In reaching this decision, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d), giving weight to Applicant’s 20 years of military 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18.  
 
4 AG ¶19 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
5 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual has initated and is adhereing to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
4 
 
service and prior history as a clearance holder. Applicant has mitigated the concerns 
raised by his brief history of financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
