 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01070 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 17, 2015, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 4, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines C, Foreign Preference; 
and H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse (Item 1).1 The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2016 (Item 2), and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on November 23, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as 
Items 1 through 4. She was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on 
December 8, 2016, and submitted a response, dated January 3, 2017 (Reply). Neither 
party had objections to Items 1 through 4 or Applicant’s Reply. They are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegation in ¶ 1.a of the 
SOR pertaining to her possession of a Russian identification card, with explanations. 
She admitted the factual allegations pertaining to her marijuana use from October 2009 
through February 2015 in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Items 1 and 2.) 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old, unmarried, and listed no children. She has a bachelor’s 
degree awarded in 2015. She has worked for a defense contractor since July 2015. She 
has never held a security clearance. (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant was born in Russia and is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Russia. She attended high school in the United States from September 2008 through 
May 2011. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014.2 She has a U.S. passport, 
issued in June 2015, which will expire in June 2025. (Items 3 and 4.) 
 
Applicant listed on her e-QIP that she had “an internal passport [Russian 
identification card] serving the purpose of ID on the territory of Russian Federation.” 
(Item 3) She further explained that the Russia identification card only would expire if she 
renounced her Russian citizenship, but otherwise would remain valid throughout her life. 
In her Reply, she explained that her e-QIP statement was unintentionally inaccurate 
because she did not understand Russian law relating to the identification card. It was 
only “valid from the time when a citizen is 14 years old until he/she turns 20 years old,” 
and then it would need to be renewed. (Reply.) Applicant’s Russia identification card 
was issued to her when she was 14 and became invalid on November 2013, when she 
turned 20 years old. She has no valid Russian identification cards in her possession. 
She does not intend to renew her Russian Identification card. Applicant never used this 
identification card “to travel, to vote, or to exercise any rights of Russian citizenship,” 
when it was valid. (Reply; Item 3.) 
 
Applicant’s Reply disclosed she used a Russian passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen, for travel to Russia from January 30, 2016, to February 9, 2016. That passport 
expired on May 30, 2016, and is no longer valid. She does not intend to renew her 
Russian passport. (Reply.) 
 
Applicant disclosed on her e-QIP that she used marijuana during high school and 
college about ten times between 2009 and 2015. She indicated she did not intend to 
                                                          
2 The e-QIP and Report of Investigation (ROI) list discrepant dates for Naturalization. (Items 3 and 4.) 
 
3 
 
 
use marijuana in the future because she did not “want to jeopardize [her] relationship 
with law enforcement and wish[es] to exhibit [herself] as a model citizen . . .” (Item 3.) 
She never purchased or distributed marijuana. She no longer associates with marijuana 
users. She signed a statement of intent, indicating she will not use marijuana in the 
future and acknowledged that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for 
revocation of national security eligibility. (Reply.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following were considered:   
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military 
organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in any way that conflicts with 
U.S. national security interests; 
 
 
5 
 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of 
intent to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
  As Applicant did not apply for or acquire citizenship in any other country, AG ¶ 
10(a) is inapplicable. Applicant disclosed the possession of her Russia passport and 
identity card in her e-QIP, during her security clearance interview, and in her Reply. AG 
¶ 10(b) does not apply. Applicant failed to use her U.S. passport for entering or exiting 
the U.S. during her trip to Russia in 2016, however that conduct was not alleged as 
disqualifying in the SOR.3 There is no evidence that she participated in foreign activities 
that conflict with U.S. national security interests or support the Russian government. 
The record did not disclose any financial interests or business interests in Russia. She 
has not committed any acts of expatriation. None of the disqualifying conditions are 
applicable to SOR ¶ 1.a, as alleged. 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. One condition is established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition). 
 
 Applicant used marijuana during high school and college, between October 2009 
and February 2015, approximately ten times. Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a) is established.  
 
                                                          
3 Had this conduct been alleged, it would be mitigated by AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e). Her dual citizenship is 
based on her birth in Russia, and there is no evidence of a foreign preference. She no longer has a valid 
Russian passport or identity card, and does not seek to obtain them. Further, her past use of the now 
invalid Russian passport was routine, and does not present a national security concern.  
 
6 
 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana in a social setting while in high school and college 
approximately ten times. She has now matured. She successfully graduated from 
college and has obtained employment with a defense contractor. She seeks to be a 
model citizen and not engage in immature, unlawful conduct. She no longer associates 
with marijuana users and provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement. The above conditions provide mitigation under these facts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
evidence presented. Applicant exercised poor judgment in using her Russian passport 
to travel in 2016, and smoking marijuana during high school and college. However, she 
now understands the importance of following the law and using only her U.S. passport 
to travel. She no longer has a valid Russian passport or identification card. She no 
longer illegally uses marijuana. Under the facts and circumstances surrounding this 
case, there is nothing to diminish Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment by either of the alleged security concerns. My comments regarding each 
guideline are incorporated here also.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign preference, 
drug involvement and substance abuse.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
