 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ADP Case No. 16-00272 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate concerns raised by his 
financial situation. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) recommending the denial of his application to occupy a public trust 
position. Applicant answered the SOR. He admitted the SOR allegations, including the 
12 referenced delinquent debts totaling over $10,000. He requested a decision on the 
administrative (written) record.  
 
 On October 17, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant seven exhibits (Items 1 – 7) that the Government offers 
for admission into the record. Applicant received the FORM and accompanying exhibits 
on November 15, 2016. (Appellate Exhibit I.) He was given 30 days to submit a response 
to the FORM and raise an objection(s) to the evidence offered by the Government. He 
did not submit a response or raise an objection.  
 
 On October 1, 2017, I was assigned Applicant’s case for decision. I reopened the 
record to give the parties the opportunity to submit updated information. Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel timely submitted a new credit report (Item 8), which reflects some of the 
delinquent debts referenced in the SOR and a number of new past-due accounts. 
Applicant did not submit any matters for the record, nor did he raise any objection to the 
evidence offered by the Government. Without objection, Items 1 – 8 are admitted. The 
record closed on October 6, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 41, earned his GED in 2002. He took some courses through an online 
college from 2007 to 2008, but did not earn a degree. He and his first wife divorced in 
October 2012, and he married his current spouse in December 2012. Applicant and his 
spouse have five children. Applicant has been working for his current employer since 
2002. He was granted a public trust position in approximately 2005.  
 
In August 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations 
processing. On the questionnaire, Applicant listed receiving a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
discharge in approximately October 2012. During the course of the subsequent 
investigation, Applicant was asked about a number of past-due accounts appearing on 
his credit reports, including the 12 delinquent debts referenced in the SOR. In response 
to an interrogatory, dated November 24, 2015, Applicant reported that, after paying 
recurring expenses and debts, his monthly deficit is $1,250. He also reported being 
delinquent on his monthly car payments and utilities.  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant noted that his financial problems were 
primarily attributable to his divorce and supporting his family on his salary alone. He 
indicated that he had a plan to address his financial situation, but did not elaborate further. 
He also did not provide any evidence about what steps, if any, he had taken to address 
his past-due debts. A current credit report, Item 8, reflects a number of delinquent 
accounts beyond those listed on the SOR.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive) and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, through Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).1 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) 
(judges must utilize current DoD policy and standards). 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. The 
standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available 
                                                          
1 See SEAD-4, ¶ E.1 (the current guidelines “shall be used by all authorized adjudicative agencies when 
rendering a determination for initial or continued eligibility . . . to hold a sensitive position.”). See also ADP 
Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“the Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the Directive, 
including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) Nonetheless, I have considered the previous 
version of the guidelines (Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, dated December 29, 2005), and my ultimate conclusion in this case would be the same. 
 
3 
 
 
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.2  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a federal 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and whole-
person concept. In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
the guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.3 
 
The Directive sets forth the due process procedures that must be followed in all 
DOHA proceedings. Department Counsel must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts (i.e., SOR allegations denied by the applicant). While an applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate relevant conduct or circumstances that he or she admitted or proven by 
Department Counsel. An applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish 
their eligibility for a position of trust. Any doubt raised by the evidence, must be resolved 
by the judge in favor of the national security.4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems raise a concern about his ability to hold a 
sensitive position. The financial considerations concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 The concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise sensitive information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information.5 
                                                          
2 Memorandum; Directive, § 3.2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. ADP Case No. 14-00590 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2014) (“The 
standard applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988) regarding security clearances: such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly 
consistent with the interests of the national security’.”) 
 
3 See generally SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2.  
 
4 Directive, ¶ E3.1.25; SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 1(d). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012) 
 
4 
 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Individuals applying for a sensitive position are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate concerns raised by their circumstances, to 
include the presence of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that 
they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted a position of trust.6 
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. He may in the future 
be able to (re-)establish his eligibility for a position of trust by showing that he has 
addressed his past-due debts and is managing his personal finances in a responsible 
manner. At present, however, the questions and doubts about his eligibility, which were 
raised by the presence of delinquent debt following a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, 
remain. AG ¶¶ 19(a) – 19(c) apply. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. 
Applicant’s financial situation remains a concern.7 
 
  
                                                          
6 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
7 In reaching this adverse decision, I considered the whole-person concept. See generally AG ¶ 2. I also 
considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case.  
 
5 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
