 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02037 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 20, 2016. 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 through 5 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 2000. He never 
married, but is in a relationship and has cohabitated since April 2014. He has no children. 
He has worked for his present employer since May 2015 and does not list any periods of 
unemployment on his 2015 security clearance application (SCA)1.  
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts. Three are student loans in collection (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-$29,250; 1.b-$7,863; 1.p-$5,924); six are past-due student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 
1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i); four are medical debts in collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.j-$128; 1.k-$50; 1.q-
$198; and 1.r-$50); one is a consumer debt in collection (SOR ¶ 1.j-$936); and four are  
judgments filed between 2011 and 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.l-$5,205; 1.m-$1045; 1.n-$2,088; and 
1.o-$426).2 Applicant did not disclose any of those delinquent debts, past-due student 
loans, or judgments on his SCA. Credit reports from May 2016, August 2015, and 
Applicant’s admissions substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR.3 
 
 In March 2016, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He 
explained he attended college online full-time at night. He had difficulty paying his student 
loans when they became due and paying other expenses. He told the investigator that he 
had paid off some student loans, had consolidated others, and was making payments on 
some. He told the investigator that he did not disclose on his SCA his past-due student 
loans because he was addressing them.4  
 
 Applicant acknowledged to the investigator that he had medical bills in collection. 
He stated that he was currently making payments on them. He told the investigator he 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
4 Item 3.  
 
 
3 
 
 
did not disclose these debts on his SCA because he was addressing them and did not 
think that he needed to list them.5  
 
Applicant disclosed he had judgments entered against him because of damages 
to a residence he rented that was caused by his dog. He was unable to pay the damages. 
He told the investigator that in approximately February 2016 his pay was garnished to 
pay for the damages. He did not disclose these judgments because he was addressing 
them. He also had a judgment entered against him in 2013 for an unpaid car loan (SOR 
¶ 1.l). He purchased the vehicle and was unable to work for a number of days, and he 
subsequently returned the car to the creditor. He acknowledged he was aware he still 
owed money on the delinquent debt. He stated he was currently addressing the issue to 
establish a repayment schedule. He stated he failed to disclose this debt on his SCA 
because he was addressing it and he did think he needed to list it.6  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that he was unaware of the delinquent collection 
account in SOR ¶ 1.h, but would contact the creditor and address it.7  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts and judgments. He told the investigator 
that he was addressing most of the alleged debts, including the judgments, but he did not 
provide documents to support his statements. He did not provide proof he has paid or 
resolved any of the SOR debts. He was aware of judgments entered against him for 
damage to property he rented. He was aware of the judgment entered against him for the 
defaulted car loan that is not paid. I do not find Applicant’s explanation credible that he 
did not believe he had to list any of the judgments because he was “addressing” them. 
There is no proof he was or is “addressing” them. Applicant admitted he was aware he 
had medical debts in collection, but stated he was addressing them, so he did not disclose 
them. Applicant provided no documentary proof that he was or is paying these debts. I 
find his explanation for failing to disclose his medical collections accounts is not credible. 
I find he deliberately failed to disclose judgments entered against him and his collection 
accounts. Applicant admitted in his SOR answer that he falsified his SCA when he failed 
to disclose his judgments and collection accounts.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 3. 
 
7 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent student loans, unpaid judgments, and 
collection accounts that he has been unable or unwilling to resolve. They remain 
unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a period when his student loans 
became due, and he had difficulty paying his other expenses. He admitted all of the debts 
in the SOR. He failed to provide documented evidence that he has resolved any of the 
debts or judgments in the SOR. His financial issues are ongoing and recent. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 For the application of AG ¶ 20(b) the circumstances that created the financial 
problems must have been largely beyond Applicant’s control, and he must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant attributed his financial problems to a 
period when his student loans became due and he was unable to pay his other expenses. 
I cannot find that his financial problems were largely beyond his control. Applicant was 
aware that he obtained student loans, and that he would be required to pay them. He 
indicated to the investigator that he consolidated his student loans and paid them. 
However, he failed to provide evidence to show his student loans are paid or being paid. 
He was aware that he has judgments entered against him and other delinquent accounts. 
He told the investigator that he was addressing them. No supporting evidence was 
provided. There is insufficient evidence to conclude he has acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling and that his 
finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant failed to provide 
documentary evidence to show he is paying or addressing any of the SOR debts. AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(e) has 
not been raised.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following one potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
 
7 
 
 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant had four judgments entered against him from 2011 to 2013. He was 
aware he was responsible for damage to his residence and could not pay for it. He was 
aware judgments had been entered against him and his wages were later garnished. He 
was aware that he could not pay his car loan, subsequently returned the car, and knew a 
judgment was entered against him. He was aware he had medical debts in collection. His 
explanation to the investigator for failing to disclose the judgments or collections accounts 
was because he was addressing them. Applicant’s explanations were not credible. 
Applicant admitted in his SOR answer that he falsified this information by deliberately 
failing to disclose it. AG ¶¶ 16(a) applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following two mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct is not minor. There is no evidence he made a prompt, good-
faith effort to correct his falsification. Failing to be honest during the security clearance 
process is serious. There is insufficient evidence to conclude it happened under unique 
circumstances or it is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. The above mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
8 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. He has delinquent student loans, judgments, and 
collection accounts that are unresolved. He deliberately failed to disclose his judgments 
and collection accounts on his SCA, as required. He failed to provide documents to 
substantiate his statements that he has paid or is paying some of his debts. There is 
insufficient evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
