 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00701 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 22, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 19, 2016.2 The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-8 (Item 1 includes pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on 
November 11, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections, but did 
submit exhibits (AE) A-P. Items 2-8 and AE A-P are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. The admissions 
are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since April 
2004. He has been primarily deployed during that timeframe to Afghanistan. He served 
in the Army from 1987 to 1998 when he was medically discharged. He is married for the 
second time, his first marriage ending in divorce. He has four children. He has a 
bachelor’s degree.3  
  
 The SOR alleged a dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy (July 2016), three federal 
tax liens filed in 2011 and 2012, totaling $75,994, and delinquent home mortgage 
payments from 2009 to March 2015. The allegations are supported by credit reports 
from December 2014, June 2015, and June 2016; Applicant’s November 2014 security 
clearance application (SCA); court filings concerning his Chapter 13 bankruptcy; his 
interview with a defense investigator in September 2015; and his SOR admissions.4 
 
 Applicant explained that since about 2004 he has worked in a deployed 
environment while his wife takes care of the family finances. He also admitted failing to 
handle their financial obligations properly. He claims he received poor financial advice 
on negotiating with their mortgage lender to reduce their payments. To avoid mortgage 
foreclosure, they filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. A bankruptcy plan was 
approved and Applicant sporadically made his monthly payments of $4,450, however, 
several months he paid less than the plan required. In July 2016, his Chapter 13 was 
dismissed because he was approximately $12,250 delinquent on his plan payments. 
Applicant refiled a Chapter 13 petition in August 2016. The listed liabilities in his petition 
                                                          
2 Included within the FORM were two amendments to the SOR propounded by Department Counsel. The 
first amendment replaced language in SOR ¶ 1.a. The second amendment added an allegation SOR ¶ 
1.f. On November 11, 2016, Applicant received the FORM containing the amendments and admitted 
both. AE B.  
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Items 1-8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
amounted to over $800,000. There is no documentary evidence of an approved 
bankruptcy plan, but Applicant documented he made $6,000 monthly payments from 
September to November 2016 to the bankruptcy trustee. 5  
 
 Applicant’s federal tax liability and liens resulted from an audit of his 2007 taxes 
where it was determined he incorrectly filed his tax returns; and he did not properly 
report the sale of a residence. This resulted in tax liability in excess of $75,000. He 
claims to have set up a monthly payment plan of $1,200 to the IRS, making those 
payments until he filed his Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2015. He provided documentation 
showing he made one payment of $1,000 in September 2011, one payment of $1,205 in 
November 2011, and one payment of $500 in February 2013. No further proof of 
payments under the payment plan was offered, but he did provide documentation 
showing that previous tax-year refunds were applied against his total tax debt. As of 
October 2016, he still owed over $19,000 toward his 2008 tax liability. The tax debt are 
unresolved.6 
 
 In 2006, Applicant purchased a home valued at approximately $500,000. He 
secured two mortgages to finance the home. The combined monthly payments for the 
mortgages was about $3,000. He made his last payment in 2009. Because of the 
market crash, his home lost significant value. He sought to work with his mortgage 
lender to modify his mortgage. Applicant provided documentation showing the efforts he 
made to negotiate a mortgage modification, which included using a foreclosure 
mediation service in June 2012 and hiring a law firm in January 2013 to defend against 
foreclosure and seek a loan modification. In 2014, the lender began foreclosure 
proceedings. The foreclosure was stayed when Applicant filed his 2015 Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. When he was making payments under the Chapter 13 plan, his 
mortgage payment was included in the $4,450 amount.7 
 
 Applicant’s second Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing in August 2016, disclosed a 
monthly income and expense schedule, which calculated his monthly net income as 
$22,708 and net monthly expenses as $13,239 (this amount included payments of 
$1,992 for two mortgages; $541 for a car payment; and $4,195 for taxes owed). His 
monthly remainder after all expenses was listed as $9,468. Applicant also has 
approximately $34,400 in deferred student loans. No payment plan was included for this 
debt. In addition to the mortgage modification assistance, there is evidence of financial 
counseling through the bankruptcy process.8 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Items 1, 3, 7-8; AE A, C. 
 
6 Item 3; AE D, I, J. 
 
7 Items 3-6; AE K-N. 
 
8 Items 5, 8. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2015 with liabilities listed in 
excess of $800,000. That case was dismissed because Applicant failed to make the 
required plan payments. He refiled a second Chapter 13 action in August 2016. The IRS 
filed approximately $75,000 worth of federal tax liens against Applicant. He continues to 
owe at least $19,000 in federal tax debt. He failed to make his monthly mortgage 
payments from about 2009, which sent his home into foreclosure proceedings that were 
stayed by his Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. I find all the disqualifying conditions are 
raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. He attempted to 
resolve his financial problems by filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but he failed to make 
required plan payments resulting in his case being dismissed. He refiled, but failed to 
provide evidence that a Chapter 13 plan was approved and that he is complying with 
that plan. He has owed federal taxes since 2007. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s 
reliance on his wife’s financial acumen while he was deployed may be considered a 
condition beyond his control, however, he failed to take responsible actions to address 
his debts and taxes. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant provided sufficient 
evidence to show that he was making a good-faith effort to work a mortgage 
modification to avoid foreclosure on his residence. However, his taxes and remaining 
debts have not been fully addressed. There is evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his military service, his 
civilian employment, his extensive deployment history, and the circumstances that led to 
his financial difficulties. Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.e:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
