 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01169 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F. On 
November 29, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on January 27, 2017. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 2, 2017. She 
was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit any additional information within the 
30-day period. On October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to another administrative 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
judge, and on October 16, 2017, the case was reassigned to me. The Government 
exhibits, Items 1 through 6, in the FORM, are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations. Her admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old administrative assistant employed by a defense 
contractor since September 2012. She seeks a security clearance in conjunction with 
her current employment.2 Applicant graduated from high school in May 1995. She 
received a medical assistant diploma in August 2004, and attended an online university 
from September 2011 to April 2013, but did not graduate. She married in October 1998, 
and has three minor children.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists eight allegations to include a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in 
October 2000 and discharged in January 2001, a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in October 
2014 and discharged in January 2015, and six debts totaling approximately $10,784. 
Three of those six debts are student loans totaling $8,432.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – l.h) These 
allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions and the Government’s 
exhibits. (Items 1 – 6) 
 
Applicant’s most recent October 2014 Chapter 7 bankruptcy listed $110,307 in 
liabilities and her January 2015 discharge totaled $106,747. (Items 6, 7) Applicant 
attributed her financial delinquencies to her husband’s lay-off. She stated that a tax-
offset payment was credited to her delinquent student loans and that those student 
loans were in a loan rehabilitation program. She also stated that payment arrangements 
had been made for the remaining accounts. Applicant failed to provide any 
documentation to corroborate these claims in her SOR answer. (Item 1) According to 
her SF-86, Applicant has been working continuously since August 2010. (Item 2) 
  
In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of her delinquent SOR 
accounts. She did not describe financial counseling or present a budget. The FORM 
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
2 Applicant previously applied for a public trust position on December 22, 2010. On September 26, 2012, 
DOD issued her an SOR citing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E 
(personal conduct – falsifying her security clearance application). In response to her SOR, Applicant 
requested a decision based on the written record. On March 4, 2013, Administrative Judge Jennifer 
Goldstein issued a decision denying her eligibility for access to sensitive information, finding that 
Applicant had failed to mitigate both Guidelines F and E security concerns. (Item 1) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
noted that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in the FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists seven potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the 
facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have 
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 
2(d). Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority of her adult life, and she is 
presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information 
suggesting her financial problems are being adequately addressed, doubts remain 
about her suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national 
interest is the principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be 
resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, she failed to 
submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
regarding her circumstances, articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security 
concerns. She failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding her past efforts to address her delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information, and in relying on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish 
mitigation, financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
