 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 16-01058 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence of resolution of his financial issues. 
Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On April 20, 2015, Applicant signed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 2. On August 18, 2016, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006. The SOR set forth security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Item 1. 
 
On August 26, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not 
request a hearing. Item 1. On October 12, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File 
of Relevant Material (FORM). On November 3, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, and 
he did not respond to the FORM. On October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The 
 
2 
                                         
 
case file consists of five exhibits. Items 1-5. Applicant did not object to any of the 
Government exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. Accordingly, 
I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.d. Item 1. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Additional 
findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 32 years old, and he has been employed as a data entry analyst or 
administrative support specialist since August 2009.3 He was unemployed from August 
2002 to May 2003, from June 2003 to August 2003, from August 2003 to May 2004, from 
August 2004 to May 2005, and from August 2005 to June 2006. From June 2008 to 
August 2009, he was unemployed or worked part time as a substitute teacher. In 2010, 
he received a bachelor’s degree. He has not served in the military. He has never married. 
There is no evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $23,709: ¶ 1.a is a charged-
off debt for $21,065 relating to purchase of a vehicle; ¶ 1.b is a debt placed for collection 
for $2,272 relating to an apartment lease that ended in 2013; ¶ 1.c is a debt placed for 
collection for $205; and ¶ 1.d is a debt placed for collection for $167. Items 1, 3. 
 
In his April 20, 2015 SCA, Applicant said he was unable to keep up with his 
payments on his vehicle, and he had to move out of his mother’s residence to escape 
domestic violence. Item 2. He said he contacted the creditor for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
and the creditor offered to settle the debt for $17,000. Items 2, 3. His income was reduced 
when he changed employment. He intends to pay his debts when he is able to do so. 
Applicant did not provide any additional information about resolution of any of the four 
SOR debts.  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s April 20, 
2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 2. 
 
3 
                                         
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel noted the absence of corroborating or 
supporting documentation of resolution of the SOR debts. FORM at 2. Aside from 
Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary evidence that Applicant 
paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the SOR debts. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. FORM at 2. He did 
not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 
4 
                                         
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and  
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
 
6 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant had several periods of 
unemployment or underemployment. He moved out of his mother’s home to avoid 
domestic violence. His income was reduced when he changed employment. These 
circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances. Applicant did not prove 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances because he did not show the changes in 
his income over the last five years, and he did not establish he was unable to make any 
payments to address any of the SOR debts. 
 
Applicant did not provide documentation relating to his SOR debts such as: (1) 
proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a 
letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditor; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact;6 (3) copies 
of credible debt disputes sent to the creditor and/or credit reporting companies indicating 
                                            
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
7 
                                         
 
he did not believe he was responsible for the debt and why he held such a belief; (4) 
evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or 
agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve this debt; or (5) other evidence of 
progress or resolution.  
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old, and he has been employed as a data entry analyst or 
administrative support specialist since August 2009. Applicant had six lengthy periods of 
unemployment from August 2002 to August 2009. His finances were also adversely 
affected by underemployment. In 2010, he received a bachelor’s degree. There is no 
evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
The evidence against grant of a security clearance is more substantial. Applicant’s 
SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $23,709. He did not provide sufficient evidence 
of changes in his income to show he was unable to make any payments to any of his 
SOR creditors. He provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary 
evidence of payments and an established payment plan or other mitigating information 
relating to his four SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial responsibility and 
judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More documented information 
 
8 
                                         
 
about inability to pay debts, financial history, or financial progress is necessary to mitigate 
security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations security 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial 
consideration security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
