 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01893 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
10/19/2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his failure to resolve his tax issues and his 
unresolved delinquent debts. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guidelines1 Applicant timely 
answered the SOR and requested an administrative determination. 
 
On November 22, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant eight exhibits for admission into the record. The exhibits 
accompanying the FORM and the documents Applicant submitted with his Response 
are admitted into the record. On October 1, 2017, I was assigned the case for decision.  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He works in academia, as a professor. He has various 
graduate degrees. He worked with the U.S. Army Research Laboratory from 1986-1988 
and 1989-1996.  He held a clearance for that job, but has not had one since. (Item 4) 
Applicant is married and has three children. Applicant completed his most recent 
security clearance application in June 2015, disclosing a delinquent home mortgage 
from 2007, which he said was the subject of a legal action. (Item 4) The ensuing 
investigation confirmed these details as well as other unresolved financial issues. 
 
 Applicant’s current background investigation revealed financial problems more 
extensive than those he disclosed on his June 2015 security clearance application. 
Applicant  filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2007, which was dismissed in March 
2008. He admitted it, but he gave no reason other than he “outspent” his budget. (1.a) 
He stated during his investigative interview in late 2015, that he could not maintain 
payments on his mortgage loan. (Item 6) The home went to foreclosure, but at the time 
of his interview, his wife and family members were living there and not making mortgage 
payments. (Item 6) He was emphatic that he does not owe $120,000 on the mortgage. 
(1.c) and has not made any payments since 2012. It is not clear from the record as to 
the current status because he did not submit any information. It appears that he is in a 
legal dispute with the company. After receiving an e-mail from Department Counsel 
requesting specific information, Applicant still did not provide information that would 
clearly show that he does not owe any amount after the foreclosure. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant denied two state tax liens, one filed in 2006 and another filed in 2015. 
(1.b and 1.e).  He denied four collection accounts. (1.d, 1.f-1.h) The liens and the four 
collection accounts are confirmed on recent credit bureau reports. (Items 5 and 7). 
During his interview, he claimed to have no knowledge of the liens or allegation of 
collection accounts, but would research the accounts and resolve them. However, he 
did not provide any documentation that he has satisfied the allegations. Applicant did 
not send any information with his Answer to the SOR. The information that he attached 
as a response to the FORM, does not address the tax liens or the collection accounts. 
In his letter in response to FORM, he stated that he is now disputing them, but provided 
no documentation. His budget and income are sufficient that he could pay the 
delinquent debts and tax liens and resolve his delinquent accounts. In his response to 
 
3 
 
the FORM, Applicant indicated that he would start paying his delinquent accounts when 
he was interviewed, but has provided no plan.  
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s finances remain a source of concern. Failure to meet one’s financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.2 Applicant’s 
admissions and the credit reports establish the Government’s prima facie case that 
Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and that he filed a 
chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007, but in 2008 it was dismissed. Applicant presented no 
information as to the cause of his financial difficulties, other than he “overspent”. He 
presented no documentation with his answer to the SOR, and even after receiving an e-
mail from Department Counsel regarding specific information about the status of his 
home mortgage, tax liens and other collection accounts, he did not provide relevant 
information. He stated that he was disputing items, but did not provide any evidence to 
confirm his assertion. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and were not caused 
by events beyond his control.  Although Applicant has expressed a desire to repay his 
creditors, the alleged accounts remain unresolved and Applicant did not present a plan 
for resolving them.  
  
After a review of the record and a consideration of the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2(d), I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems render him unsuitable for 
continued access to classified information at this time. It is Applicant’s burden to provide 
information to show what action he has taken towards paying, settling, or otherwise 
resolving any of his debts, in order to show that the debts are no longer a security 
concern. This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant 
cannot or will not attain the type of financial stability necessary to reapply for national 
security eligibility in the future. Rather, it is recognition of the fact that financial issues 
have historically been a motivating factor behind acts of espionage. The award of a 
security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the 
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. While a favorable 
decision is not warranted at this time, he may present persuasive evidence of financial 
rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1h:     Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ (18). 
 
 
5 
 
  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
