 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03768  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Attorney At Law, The Edmunds Firm 
 
 
October 2, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 18, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and F.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 16, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on May 1, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on May 30, 2017, scheduling the hearing for June 21, 2017. The hearing was convened 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
by video-teleconference as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 
through 3, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf, 
and presented twelve documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A 
through L. The record was left open until June 28, 2017, for receipt of additional 
documentation. Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, consisting of three 
pages, marked and admitted without objection as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit M.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on July 6, 2017. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, both the Government and the Applicant requested I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to the country of South Korea. Department 
Counsel provided an 8 page summary of the facts, supported by five Government 
documents pertaining to South Korea, identified as Government Exhibit 3. The 
documents provide elaboration and context for the summary.  Applicant had no 
objection.  (Tr. p. 14.)  The Applicant provided a six page summary of the facts, 
supported by six documents from the U.S. Department of State and Central Intelligence 
Agency pertaining to South Korea, identified as Applicant’s Exhibit L.  The Government 
had no objection.  I took administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. 
Government reports and the information provided by the Applicant. They are limited to 
matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married with two children.  She has a high school 
diploma, military training, and some college.  She holds the position of Logistics 
Technician with a defense contractor. She has been employed with his current 
employer since 2009.  She has held a security clearance since July 2005 without 
incident.  
  
 Applicant was born in South Korea to a Korean family.  At the age of 13, she 
moved to the United States with her family.  (Tr. p. 64.)  Applicant attended junior high 
and high school in the United States.  In 1998, Applicant joined the United States Army 
where she served honorably until her commitment was completed in July 2002.  Her 
entire service in the Army was completed in South Korea.  During her military service 
she received a number of awards and commendations including the Army 
Commendation Medal, the Army Good Conduct Medal, the National Defense Service 
Medal,  the Army Service Ribbon, the Overseas Service Medal (2 awards), and others.   
 
 
3 
 
 Following her discharge from the Army, Applicant moved back to the United 
States.  Shortly thereafter, she was offered a civilian job at a U.S. military base in South 
Korea.  She accepted the job and returned to South Korea where she has been working 
for defense contractors since then.   
 
  Applicant’s family are citizens and residents of South Korea.  In 2010, Applicant 
married a man from South Korea.  They met two years earlier, and dated for about a 
year before they were married.  He works freelancing with his brother’s recycling scrap-
wire business.  They have two children who were both born in South Korea.  Applicant 
has discussed with him the idea of applying for U.S. citizenship, but he is afraid of life 
changes.  Applicant’s husband provides no financial support to the family household.  
(Tr. p. 80.)  Applicant explained that he borrowed $50,000 from her to give his brother to 
buy a bulk of scrap-wires for the business, and she was supposed to be reimbursed.  
She has not been reimbursed.  (Tr. p. 74.)  She is not happy about this situation.    
 
 Applicant’s daughter is six years old, her son is two years old.  They are 
residents of South Korea and dual citizens of South Korea and the United States.  
Applicant states that she raises them with American values.    
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of South Korea.  She is 62 years old 
and delivers milk to residences in the country side where she lives.  She does not live 
near the Applicant, who resides in South Korea.  Applicant may contact her by 
telephone twice a month for casual conversation and may see her on holidays.  Their 
contact is minimal and limited.  Applicant’s mother has no association what so ever with 
the Government of South Korea.  Applicant’s father passed away. 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of South 
Korea.  Applicant states that she may communicate with them once a year, and may 
see them on holidays or special occasions.  Her father-in-law is a retired Chinese 
Doctor of Acupuncture, her mother-in-law, is and has always been, a housewife. 
 
 Applicant has two brothers-in-law, with whom she has no communication.  They 
only know that Applicant works on a military base.  She also has two sisters-in-law, who 
are both housewives.  Applicant may see them on holidays or special occasions.     
 
 In 2010, Applicant purchased a house in South Korea.  She applied for a 
mortgage loan for approximately $97,000 and bought the house.  Applicant explained   
it was a house that she had been renting since 2005 with a 3 years key-money- lease of 
approximately $70,000.  In 2008, she signed another 3 years key-money-lease for 
approximately $90,000.  At that point, Applicant only had to pay $20,000 to the landlord.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   The house is worth $168,500.  Applicant’s name is the only 
name on title.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  She states that she is willing to sell the house if it 
jeopardizes her security clearance.  Applicant also has a Korean bank account that she 
maintains that has less than $1,000.  She also has an American bank account that has 
$10,000.  Applicant states that she plans to retire in the United States.  She also plans 
on her children attending college in the United States.  Applicant states that there is no 
situation where she would ever choose South Korea over the interests of the United 
 
4 
 
States.  She has a deep and longstanding loyalty for the United States for giving her the 
opportunity to work and support her family.  
 
 Applicant failed to file her Federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 through 
2015.  Applicant stated that she really had no good excuse for failing to handle her 
income tax returns on time.  This was around the time she was getting married and 
having a child.  Her tax status had changed and she did not know where to go for help.  
She states that she took the tax exemption status for granted.  At some point, she tried 
to file the tax returns through a tax center on base, but all of them were rejected for lack 
of signature, from herself and the tax center.  Applicant eventually consulted with the 
Internal Revenue Service, and H and R Block, who prepared her Federal income 
returns for tax years 2011 through 2015, which were filed on February 13, 2017.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit J and Tr. pp. 61-62.)   
 
 A certification of income for Applicant’s husband for year 2013, indicates that 
year he earned $51,600; for year 2014, he earned $19,200; and for year 2015, he 
earned $27,600.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.) 
 
 Performance Evaluations of the Applicant for the periods from 2013, through 
2016, reflect competent, excellent, and exceptional ratings that improved over time.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit E.) 
 
 Letters of recommendation submitted by colleagues, coworkers, and friends of 
the Applicant collectively indicate that Applicant is a true professional.  She consistently  
provides exemplary quality service, as evidenced by her strong work ethic, with a 
constant effort towards accurate and honest reporting.  She has demonstrated 
outstanding performance during all of the Government audits in the last eight years.  
She is said to be one of the most competent employees on the job, and is described as 
an individual who goes above and beyond the normal scope of work to achieve 
perfection.  She is considered to be a loyal and trustworthy American, who is dedicated 
and committed to her team, her company, and her customer.  (Applicant’s Exhibits G 
and M.)  
 
 Applicant provided a Statement of Intent never to obtain a foreign passport again.  
She also pledged to continue to have minimal contact with her foreign contacts, and to 
keep conversations casual and infrequent.  She also states that should there be any 
violation of such she agrees to an automatic revocation of her security clearance.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit H.) 
 
 Applicant also provided a Statement of Intent never to fail to pay her Federal or 
State Income tax debts again.  Should there be any violation, she agrees to automatic 
revocation of her security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice concerning the country of South Korea.  South 
Korea, officially the Republic of Korea is a self-governing state located in the southern 
part of the peninsula of Korea.  The United States and South Korea share a long history 
of friendship and cooperation based on shared values and interests.  The two countries 
 
5 
 
work together to combat regional and global threats and to strengthen their economies.  
South Korea is now the United States’ sixth-largest trading partner with a trillion-dollar 
economy.  The longstanding relationship between the U.S. and South Korea has 
brought positive rewards to the U.S. economy including more job opportunities for 
American. 
 
 South Korea is one of the seven countries most actively engaged in foreign 
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States.  Although South 
Korea is considered an ally, they have been the unauthorized recipient of technology 
controlled under U.S. export control laws, including material that could be used in 
missile delivery/reentry systems, encryption software, optics and prism data and 
infrared detectors and camera engines.  Industrial espionage remains a high profile 
concern relating to South Korea and South Korean companies.  In July 2014, a South 
Korean chemical company agreed to pay a criminal penalty of over 2 million dollars to 
resolve an investigation into the company’s attempted theft of a U.S. company’s trade 
secrets regarding a meta-aramid fiber used in protective fabrics, electrical insulation, 
and lightweight structural support for aircraft.  Sources have also reported that South 
Korea may have attempted to compromise protected technology of U.S. F-15 fighters 
that it purchased.  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for use will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the 
record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
6 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
7 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
  Applicant’s family members are citizens and residents of South Korea.    
Applicant has some contact with them, and the connections with them could potentially 
create a conflict of interest.  Applicant resides with her spouse who is also a South 
Korean national and he works with his brother’s business that could, under some 
circumstances, subject Applicant to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation 
or personal conflict of interest.   The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 The nature of the relationships with her family do not pose a security risk.  There 
is no conflict of interest.  No one in her family is associated with the South Korean 
government, nor do they show any interest in the Applicant or her work.  Any contact 
Applicant has with her extended family is minimal and casual.  Her children are small 
and do not know what she does for a living.  Her relationship with her husband seems 
troubled, but is not a risk to the U.S.  Applicant has a deep and long-standing 
relationship and loyalty to the U.S. Based upon this history, she will always resolve any 
 
8 
 
situation in favor of the U.S.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), has been 
established. 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of failing to file her Federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2011 through 2015.  Even though she is exempt from paying taxes, she knew that 
she had to file annual Federal income tax returns.  The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authorities to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 
9 
 
 Applicant has no good excuse for failing to file her Federal income tax returns in 
a timely manner.  She now understands that she must file her Federal returns each year 
on time irrespective of whether she owes taxes or not.  She has demonstrated that she 
has filed these returns for tax years 2011 through 2014, and has no tax indebtedness.  
Full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) and 20(g) has been established. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
As a veteran of the armed forces and a civilian employee for the defense 
department, Applicant has displayed loyalty and commitment and provides valuable 
service to the U.S.  Applicant has no history of misconduct or security violations.  Her 
South Korean connections do not pose a risk to the U.S. government.  Applicant 
obviously has the level of judgment required to access classified information as 
evidenced by her longstanding commitment to our country.     
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated both the Foreign Influence and Financial Considerations 
security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
