 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-02439 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Postion ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) on 
January 12, 2016. On August 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF 
acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 13, 2016, admitting the allegations 
at SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j and electing to have his case decided on the written 
record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on September 28, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on October 5, 2016, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant provided no response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, 
identified as Items 1 through 4, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on September 15, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. He obtained his GED in 1998. He never married and 
reports no military service. He reports periods of unemployment from July 2010 to June 
2011, and from October 2015 to present. He disclosed some of his delinquent debts in 
section 26 of his January 2016 e-QIP, including his failure to timely file federal and state 
income tax returns for 2008 through 2014. He mailed in his over-due returns all at once 
on January 1, 2016 coincidentally with filing his e-QIP. Applicant’s only explanation for 
this tardiness was that he could not pay his taxes due to unspecified financial troubles.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the multiple allegations of failure to 
file his federal and state income tax returns for the years 2008 to 2014, because he had 
just filed the returns days earlier. He also stated that he had entered into a payment 
plan with the IRS and State One. He claimed to have paid all back taxes owed to State 
Two. Applicant attached to his Answer a payment arrangement coupon dated August 
10, 2016, reflecting a payment due of $87 on August 20, 2016, and a payoff amount of 
$1,773 owed to State One. He also attached an IRS installment-agreement monthly 
payment of $52 due on September 16, 2016. However, Applicant produced no evidence 
of having paid these bills or any track record of actual payments in accordance with the 
plans. 
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts in addition to the three allegations of 
failure to file federal and state tax returns (for two states) from 2008 to 2014. In 
response to the allegations that he admitted at SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j, 
Applicant stated “I intend to pay off this debt as my financial situation allows.” He has 
produced no evidence of any payments. In SOR ¶ 1.g, Applicant claimed to be paying 
the creditor $50 per month as his situation allows, and he claims a balance owed of 
$1,032. Similarly, he claims to be paying the creditor at SOR ¶ 1.h $50 each month as 
his situation allows, and he owes a balance of $3,332. Again, he has produced no 
evidence of payments or evidence that he obtained credit or debt consolidation 
counseling or has a budget.  
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s January 12, 2016 
Questionnaire for National Security Position (e-QIP) and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR dated September 
13, 2016.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                          Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Code of Federal Regulations Title 32 – National Defense, part 154.13 and part 
154, Appendix J – ADP Position Categories and Criteria for Designating Positions)  
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.” The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in DOD Directive 5220.6 before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 
18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual federal, state or local income tax as required. 
  
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c) and 19(f) thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.3  
 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with appropriate tax authority to 
file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant did not file his 2008 through 2014 federal or state income tax returns 
until he was about to file his e-QIP. He provided no adequate explanation for his tax 
problems or for his inability or unwillingness to pay his other delinquent debts. He has 
not established that these delinquent debts arose from circumstances or were due to 
conditions that were beyond his control. He has not produced relevant and responsive 
documentation, demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant has not met his burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial 
problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur. His income tax returns were filed late without 
explanation. The other seven delinquent debts have not been resolved. AG ¶ 20(g) has 
partial application. The other mitigating conditions enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of public trust by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR, except for his late filing of his income tax 
returns, and he has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a trustworthiness concern. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a position 
of trust. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:              Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a position of 
trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                   
 
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
