 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02448 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 14, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 13, 2016. 
 
2 
 
 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items I through 5 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is not married, but lives with his cohabitant since May 
2011. He has no children. He graduated from high school in 2001. He was unemployed 
from December 2010 to February 2011, but otherwise has been employed since 2008. 
He has been employed with his current employer since April 2014.1 
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to file his 2003, 2004, 2009, 2013, and 2014 
federal and state income tax returns. On his October 2015 security clearance application 
he disclosed he failed to file his 2003 tax returns and failed to pay them because he 
“worked for contractor and was unaware of unpaid taxes for that year. Have been paying 
on this for years out of returns from other employment.”2 He estimated he owed $1,300 
in taxes.. He further disclosed that he had contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
and had “received all info[rmation],”3 and he was in the process of paying this tax debt 
through “returns from recent years.”4  
 
 Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he failed to file his 2009 federal and state 
income tax returns and pay because he “was in the middle of [Family and Medical Leave 
Act] and did not file for that year.”5 He disclosed he owed approximately $4,000. He stated 
he had contacted the IRS and said: “All info has been received and paperwork is on its 
way to the IRS for filing. Returns from 2014 and 2015 will go towards paying this amount 
down.”6 He also stated that he sent the IRS paperwork to request a payment plan for $50 
a month.7 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 3. I will not consider Applicant’s failure to pay his federal and state income tax returns for disqualifying 
purposes, but may consider it when making a credibility determination, in mitigation, and in a whole-person 
analysis.  
 
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 3. 
 
7 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he filed his 2013 federal and state tax returns 
through a commercial tax preparer. He was unaware that his return was rejected until he 
attempted to file his 2014 returns. He stated he was sending the 2013 returns with the 
other years he failed to file. He anticipated receiving a refund from the federal and state 
income tax returns and it would be used to pay the 2003 and 2009 amounts owed. With 
regard to his 2014 tax returns, he disclosed he had not filed them because his 2013 
returns were rejected. He indicated he contacted the IRS and was filing his 2014 federal 
and state income returns with the other years he did not file. He would use his 2014 refund 
to apply to taxes he owed.8 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he had multiple medical bills that may be 
reported on his credit report. They stemmed from a 2011 car accident. He disclosed there 
was a vehicle loan that may also be reported on his credit report as charged off. He stated 
his insurance company was required to pay this debt, but there was a $400 balance that 
he could not afford to pay because he was out of work for six months. He stated it was 
charged off when he returned to work.9  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted he is responsible for the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.l (totaling approximately $5,243). Six are medical debts 
and the remaining are consumer debts. They became delinquent beginning in 2011. The 
debts are supported by credit reports from November 2015, June 2016, and Applicant’s 
admissions.10 Applicant did not provide evidence that he has filed the delinquent federal 
and state tax returns alleged in the SOR. He has not provided evidence that he has paid, 
resolved, or is resolving any of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
                                                          
8 Item 3. 
 
9 Item 3. 
 
10 Items 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
5 
 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local tax as required. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his 2003, 2004, 2009, 2013, and 2014 federal and state tax 
returns. He has numerous delinquent debts that are unresolved. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that he filed his delinquent federal and state 
tax returns. He did not provide evidence that he has resolved or is resolving his delinquent 
debts. His financial problems are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. He 
stated in his SCA that he had a car accident in 2011 and was unemployed for six months, 
which contributed to his financial delinquencies. However, he did not offer any amplifying 
information. I find those conditions were somewhat beyond his control, but he failed to 
provide evidence he acted responsibly under the circumstances. It has been six years 
since that incident occurred. There is insufficient evidence showing how that accident 
prevented him from filing his tax returns. I find AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal application.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received or is receiving financial counseling 
and there are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved. Although, 
Applicant stated in his SCA that he contacted the IRS to resolve his tax issues, he failed 
to provide substantive proof that the delinquent returns have been filed. There is no 
evidence he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve his delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant admitted all 
of the allegations in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(e) has not been raised.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He failed to file his federal and state tax returns for 
several years and has delinquent debts that are unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
