 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02303 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial circumstances. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 On November 29, 2016, 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) and requested a determination on the 
administrative (written) record. He admitted the delinquent debts listed on the SOR. 
 
 On January 30, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant six exhibits (Items 1 – 6) that the Government offers for 
                                                          
1 The CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The CAF 
adjudicated this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, which were applicable for 
all cases falling under the jurisdiction of the Directive between September 1, 2006 and June 7, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
admission into the record. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. On October 1, 2017, 
I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative 
criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to 
classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.”2 The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found 
in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be used in all security clearance decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017.3 Accordingly, I have applied the current version of the adjudicative 
guidelines.4 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance 
decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 38, is currently working as a contractor supporting the U.S. 
Government. He graduated from high school in 1997. He is divorced and has two minor 
children. He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1997 to 2005. He 
completed his security clearance application in December 2014. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant was initially granted a security clearance in  1997, while serving in the 
U.S. military. He submitted a security clearance application in connection with his 
current job as a federal contractor in December 2014. In response to questions about 
his financial record, Applicant asserted that he had no delinquent accounts or other 
negative financial information to report. He certified the accuracy and truthfulness of his 
responses. A few days later, background investigators accessed Applicant’s credit 
report. The credit report reveals that Applicant had numerous accounts that were in 
collection, (including child support) charged off, or in foreclosure.5 
 
 In March 2015, a security clearance investigator asked Applicant if he had any 
delinquent debts or accounts in collection status. He denied having any such debts. The 
investigator then confronted Applicant with the negative information from his credit 
reports. These credit reports reflect numerous debts that were in collection, charged off, 
                                                          
2 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
3 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
4 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines and my ultimate 
decision in this case would have been the same.  
 
5 Items 5 ,6.  
 
 
3 
 
or seriously past due totaling about $27,768. Applicant admitted that his home was in 
foreclosure in  2013.6 He stated that he knew nothing of the other delinquent accounts. 
 
Many of the negative accounts Applicant discussed with the investigator over 
three years ago are listed on the SOR. As of the close of the record, the SOR debt 
remain unresolved.  
 
 Applicant gave no reasons for the delinquent debts when he answered the 
allegations on the SOR. He reports no unemployment. He provided no information 
concerning any payments made or payment plans. There are delinquent debts, property 
repossession, and a home foreclosure going back several years. There is no 
information concerning his income.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges make certain that applicants: (a) receive fair notice of the 
issues, (b) have a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) are not 
subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In deciding a case, a judge must resolve any doubt raised by the 
evidence in favor of the national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Moreover, 
the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 3, 4, 6. Applicant’s apparent lack of candor about his finances was not alleged in the SOR and 
is only being considered, if at all, in assessing mitigation, credibility, and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .7  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other 
illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and 
other qualities essential to protecting classified information.8 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts . . .; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, . . . or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial 
counseling for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection process. Instead, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles his or her personal 
financial obligations to assess how they may handle their security responsibilities.9 
Moreover, the resolution of past financial issues alone without evidence of true reform 
and rehabilitation is of limited probative value in the security clearance context.10  
 
Applicant admits he accumulated the five debts totaling over $27,000. He did not 
disclose them on his security clearance application.  Applicant has yet to take action to 
address the delinquent debts. The only SOR debt that he believes is resolved is the 
foreclosure, but there is no evidence to support his assertion. AG ¶¶ 19(a) – 19(c) 
apply. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply.  
 
Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. 
They are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve 
the delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, 
to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of 
showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access 
to classified information.11 Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. 
His financial situation continues to raise a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 An administrative judge must make a commonsense judgment about a person’s 
security clearance suitability after considering all available, reliable and relevant 
information. This is referred to as the whole-person concept.12 A judge’s assessment in 
these cases is informed by the guidelines, as well as the non-exclusive factors set forth 
                                                          
9 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
10 Compare, ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (despite the presence of unresolved debt, 
Board affirmed judge’s grant of a clearance because clear evidence of reform and rehabilitation), with, 
ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (applicant’s resolution of alleged financial issue (filed 
overdue tax returns) was insufficient to mitigate security concerns, because no extenuating 
circumstances to explain financial issue and no evidence of financial reform). 
 
11 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2016) (reasonable for judge to expect an applicant to present documentary evidence).  
 
12 See generally AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
 
6 
 
in AG ¶¶ 2(d) and 2(f). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and highlight some 
additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military from 1997 to 2005. He has worked overseas 
to support  U.S. missions. However, he has yet to take the necessary responsible steps 
to put his financial house in order. This is despite being aware for some time that his 
delinquent debts placed his clearance eligibility (and his likely continued employment as 
a federal contractor) in jeopardy. He may in the future be able to re-establish his 
eligibility by demonstrating that he is responsibly managing his personal finances in the 
manner expected of all clearance holders. At present, however, the questions and 
doubts about his eligibility, which were raised by his financial situation, remain. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for continued 
access to classified information.13 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Noreen Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 I considered the exceptions listed in Appendix C to SEAD-4, and do not find that any are warranted in 
this case. Notably, in light of Applicant’s repeated unkept promises to provide proof that he is repaying his 
past-due debts, continuing his clearance upon condition of proof of repayment and maintenance of 
financial stability would not be appropriate in this case. Furthermore, Applicant’s apparent lack of candor 
during the security clearance investigation also weighs against exercising this discretionary authority. See 
SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h); contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) 
(under previous version of the guidelines, judges had “no authority to grant an interim, conditional or 
probationary clearance.”)  
