 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00342 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 8, 2015. On 
June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 12, 2016, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations with explanations and electing to have her case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on May 3, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on May 14, 2017, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant provided no response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as 
Items 1 through 7, is admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. She graduated from high school in 2001 and took some 
college courses but did not obtain a degree. She has been employed in janitorial 
services for a federal contractor since February 2014. Applicant reports no military 
service and she has never married. She was unemployed from March 2010 to February 
2013. Then, she was employed from February to September 2013, and unemployed 
from September 2013 to February 2014. She is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time.  
 
Applicant’s admissions to all eight allegations of delinquent debts contained in 
the SOR, as well as her admission to failure to timely file federal income tax returns for 
2014, are adopted as findings of fact. Five of the SOR allegations are for delinquent 
student loans owed to the U.S. Department of Education, totaling $49,476 of the 
$50,536 total. In her Answer, she stated that she is trying to enroll in a student-loan-
forgiveness program to resolve these debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1c; 1.g and 1.h. Applicant 
explained that she would attempt to set a payment plan to pay the delinquent debts 
alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d (personal loan) and 1.e. She indicated that she never received 
the medical bill in SOR ¶1.f, but she did admit going to the doctor, and owing this 
medical bill.  
 
Applicant denied the allegation of failure to timely file her federal income tax 
return for 2008 because she never received a W-2 for that tax year. Her SCA indicates 
that she was employed throughout 2008. She concedes that she does owe $4,000 in 
back taxes for that tax year. She did admit to the SOR ¶ 1.i allegation of failure to file 
her federal income tax return for 2014 because she asked for an extension to file late 
but never did. At the time of her July 2016 Answer, she promised to resolve the issue. 
She provided no documentary evidence to show that she reached out to the IRS or her 
creditors, or established a payment plan, or filed her overdue income tax returns.   
 
           In her October 2015 clearance interview, Applicant disclosed that she had been 
diagnosed with a disabling illness and moved in with her parents. She pays no rent 
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s April 8, 2015 security 
clearance application (SCA) and the summary of her security clearance interview on October 29, 2015.  
 
 
3 
 
 
currently and earns $9.00 per hour at her job. Otherwise, she provided no explanation 
about how she fell behind on her student loans. She provided no information about her 
other charged-off debts, her delinquent medical bill, or whether she disputed, 
compromised, settled or otherwise resolved them. The eight SOR debts total 
approximately $50,536. She provided no documentary evidence to show any progress 
on these debts; that she obtained credit or debt-consolidation counseling, or that she 
has a budget.  
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state or local income tax  
returns or failure to pay annual federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant’s SOR debts are confirmed by her credit reports, clearance interview, 
and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.3 The 
Government also produced substantial evidence to the support the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 19(f), at least with respect to the 2014 income tax return. Applicant 
has not met her burden.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has longstanding financial problems that are ongoing and recent. She 
endured a long period of unemployment from early 2010 to approximately early 2014, 
with the exception of a nine-month period during 2013. She also has a recently 
diagnosed medical problem but apparently she is still able to work. She provided no 
other explanation for her inability or unwillingness to pay her delinquent debts. Arguably, 
her illness and unemployment were due to conditions that were beyond her control. 
Nevertheless, she has not produced relevant and responsive documentation, 
demonstrating that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not 
met her burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial problems are 
under control, and that her debts were incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. The eight delinquent SOR debts have not been resolved. She provided 
no information that her 2008 or 2014 federal income tax returns have yet been filed. 
None of the mitigating conditions enumerated above apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and has not met her burden of 
production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                   
 
    ________________________ 
 
7 
 
 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
