 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02450 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Guideline E (personal conduct) security concerns are mitigated; however, 
Guideline H (drug involvement) security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. 
On October 19, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on February 1, 2017. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 6, 2017. He 
was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit any additional information within the 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
30-day period. On October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The Government 
exhibits, Items 1 through 5, included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations. His admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow. 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old software test engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2008. He seeks to retain his security clearance for his current 
employment. Applicant graduated from high school in June 2004. He was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in April 2008. Applicant has never married and has no dependents. 
He did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana with varying frequency from about August 
2004 through July 2013. (Items 3-5) He began experimenting with marijuana in 
September 2004, about one month after he started college. He estimated that he used 
marijuana about 12 times while in college. After college, he used marijuana on at least 
two occasions during the approximate timeframe of August 2011 through July 2013, 
after he was granted a DOD security clearance in October 2010. 
 
 Applicant stated in his October 2016 SOR answer that he had no future 
intentions of using marijuana; however, he voiced the same intention in his September 
14, 2010 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI). 
(Items 2 and 5) He still associates with the friend who supplied the marijuana during his 
post-security clearance marijuana use; although he stated he rarely see this friend more 
than once or twice a year. (Item 2) Applicant did express remorse for using marijuana 
while holding a security clearance recognizing “immediately afterwards that [he] made a 
mistake.” (Item 2) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s SOR cross-alleges the same conduct under the personal conduct 
guideline as alleged under the drug involvement guideline.  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
   
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misue 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 provides three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);” “(c) 
illegal possession of a controlled substance . . . ;” and “(f) any illegal drug use while 
granted access to classified information or holding a sensitive position.” 
 
Applicant possessed and used marijuana2 on numerous occasions while holding 
a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(f) are established.  
 
AG ¶ 26 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
                                                          
2 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. 
§ 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement Administration 
listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 
U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. DNI Memorandum ES 2014-00674, 
“Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use,” October 25, 2014, indicates: 
 
[C]hanges to state laws and the laws of the District of Columbia pertaining 
to marijuana use do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines . . . . An individual’s disregard of federal law pertaining to the 
use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains adjudicatively relevant in 
national security determinations. As always, adjudicative authorities are 
expected to evaluate claimed or developed use of, or involvement with, 
marijuana using the current adjudicative criteria. The adjudicative authority 
must determine if the use of, or involvement with, marijuana raises 
questions about the individual’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
willingness to comply with law, rules, and regulations, including federal 
laws, when making eligibility decisions of persons proposed for, or 
occupying, sensitive national security positions. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant used marijuana on varying 
occasions from August 2004 to July 2013, and used marijuana on at least two 
occasions while holding a security clearance. It is unfortunate that Applicant did not 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
adhere to the prohibition against using drugs while holding a security clearance. His 
assurances of future drug avoidance ring hollow in light of his previous promise to avoid 
drug use during his September 14, 2010 OPM PSI. Drug involvement security concerns 
are not mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual 
or group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges under the personal conduct guideline the same conduct 
alleged under the drug involvement guideline. All of Applicant’s conduct causing a 
security concern in SOR ¶ 2.a is explicitly covered under Guideline H, and that conduct 
is sufficient to warrant revocation of his security clearance under Guideline H. AG ¶¶ 
16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. Applicant’s involvement with marijuana affects his 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
professional and community standing. However, this conduct does not create a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because security officials are aware 
of it. AG ¶ 16(e) is not established. Guidelines H and E address identical issues 
involving judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Guideline E concerns constitute a 
duplication of the concerns under Guideline H, and accordingly, personal conduct 
security concerns in SOR ¶ 2.a are found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Unmitigated drug involvement 
security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is 
not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination 
that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a 
security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented drug abstinence 
and compliance with applicable regulations, he may well be able to demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
In closing, Applicant chose to rely on the written record versus a hearing. In so 
doing, however, and with regard to drug involvement, he failed to submit sufficient 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position limiting my assessment that . In particular, his 
evidence did not adequately address the drug involvement concerns outlined in AG ¶¶ 
26(a) and 26(b), and my decision was limited to that discussed in the FORM. I have 
carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the AGs, to the 
facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal conduct security 
concerns are mitigated; however, drug involvement security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
