 
1 
 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
               
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 16-02952 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
                      
            
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 20, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On May 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed the factual reasons for the action under the 
security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant timely 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
  
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
 
2 
 
 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
On July 25, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On August 15, 2017, the 
hearing was held as scheduled. On October 17, 2017, after reviewing Applicant’s 
hearing transcript, evidence, and post-hearing evidence, I e-mailed the parties 
indicating that this case was appropriate for a summary disposition in Applicant’s 
favor. Applicant did not object. Department Counsel had 10 days to consider the 
matter and provided written notice that Department Counsel did not object.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleged allegations under Guideline F that were caused by a 
loss of income following his discharge from the Navy in 2013, and events beginning in 
2011 that led to a contentious and costly divorce in 2015. He has paid or otherwise 
resolved all of his debts. Applicant successfully held a clearance during his ten years 
in the Navy and has an excellent reputation for trustworthiness.  Based on the record 
evidence as a whole, I conclude that Department Counsel presented sufficient 
evidence to establish the facts alleged in the SOR under Guideline F. I also conclude 
that Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts 
admitted by Applicant or proven by Department Counsel. In particular, I conclude that 
the financial considerations security concerns are resolved in whole or in part under 
the following mitigating conditions: AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e).  
 
The concerns over Applicant’s history of financial problems do not create doubt 
about his current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole 
and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I 
conclude that he met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. This case is decided for Applicant.  
 
 
 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
