 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 16-01763 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoain, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
10/25/2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. He mitigated the personal conduct under 
Guideline E. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 16, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) January 4, 2016. (Item 6) 
After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On November 24, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal 
conduct under Guideline E. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 16, 2016, admitting all of the 
allegations, which include consumer accounts and medical accounts under Guideline F 
totaling approximately $22,745. Applicant admitted the one allegation of falsification of 
information in his e-QIP under Guideline E. He elected to have the matter decided on 
the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on January 30, 2017. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on February 3, 2017. He was provided the opportunity to file objections and to 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on October 1, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 5) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I will 
consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 55 years old. He attended college after high school until 2002, but he did 
not receive a degree. Applicant married in 1996, and has two children. (Item 3) He has 
never held a security clearance. He has been employed with his current employer since 
2015 
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Items 4 and 5) confirm the following 
delinquent debts for Applicant: a  charged off account in the amount of $8,188 (SOR 
1.a); a past-due credit card balance for $912 (SOR 1.b); a charged-off account in the 
amount of $2,160 (SOR 1.c); a charged-off account in the amount of $2,099 (SOR 1.d); 
a collection account for $1,852 (SOR 1.e); five collection accounts totaling $5,1220 
(SOR 1.f-l); and a medical account in the amount of $214 (SOR 1.m). The amount of 
the delinquent debt is approximately $122,745.  
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges one personal conduct security concern for failing to provide full, 
accurate, and complete information on his November 16, 2015 e-QIP. Applicant 
allegedly did not list all his delinquent accounts in response to question 26 of the e-QIP. 
Applicant responded “yes” to the question involving routine delinquent accounts and 
listed two accounts. He elaborated that he was on a payment plan in response to 
financial question in Section 26 of the e-QIP. He listed one account from 2001 and one 
from 2012. He admitted to the personal conduct allegation, but said that he thought by 
responding “yes,” it would cover all of his current and past debts. (Answer to SOR). 
 
 In the PSI, Applicant reported that the numerous accounts became delinquent 
due to his unemployment on various occasions. From January 2008 to June 2008, from 
August 2013 to May 2014, and from July 2015 to September 2015, Applicant was 
unemployed and seeking employment. He received unemployment benefits in the 
amount of $155 weekly.  When questioned about the delinquent debts, he stated that in 
2013, he contacted the creditors and tried to arrange payment plans. (Item 2 and 6) He 
noted that he had some temporary employment but could not satisfy the debts. He was 
aware of the accounts but only listed the ones on which he was making payments. 
During the interview he noted that he had not contacted all the creditors, but in his 
answer to the SOR, he stated that he had either paid the accounts in full or that he was 
in a payment plan. (Item 2) Applicant noted that he intends to pay all the delinquent 
debts as soon as he has the money to do so. He stated that he has never sought 
financial counseling and at present his financial status is not good, but he intends to 
change that in the future. He hopes that all debts will be paid in one to two years. (Item 
6) 
  
 Applicant provided no information as to his current salary or savings. He did not 
mention that he was using a budget. He was not more specific in his answer or provide 
receipts for the accounts that he stated he paid in full, and he did not respond to the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not provide any documents to verify his SOR response. He did not 
present any documents to verify that he contacted creditors to make payment or 
settlement arrangements. He did not provide any evidence of his efforts to pay, settle, 
compromise, dispute, or otherwise resolve any of the delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant failed to list all his delinquent accounts on his security clearance 
application, but he did respond affirmatively to the section regarding delinquent debts 
and listed two accounts. He admitted the allegation but he appears to say that it was 
inadvertent due to the fact that he responded “yes” to the section 26 –financial record. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
 
5 
 
 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Credit reports reveal and Applicant admitted that he has multiple delinquent 
debts dating to as early as 2003. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and    
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The information raises issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
6 
 
 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous and, 
recent, and although they were incurred under circumstances beyond his control, such 
as unemployment, he did not present any information to support a conclusion that he 
acted responsibly. He did not provide any evidentiary documentation to support any 
good-faith efforts that he has made to resolve the financial issues. He intends to pay his 
debts, but promises in the future are not sufficient to mitigate security concerns under 
the financial considerations guideline. Applicant did not provide information concerning 
financial counseling. He did not present a plan to resolve his financial problems or any 
efforts to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. Accordingly, he has not established a 
good-faith effort to pay his debts.  
 
 Due to insufficient information in this record, there is no opportunity to gauge his 
actions to pay his debts. Applicant did not provide any references or performance 
reviews to support a whole-person assessment. There is no clear evidence that his debt 
problems have been resolved, so his finances are not under control. Overall, he has not 
proven that he acted with reason and responsibility towards his finances. Applicant did 
not present sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks 
whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence that the person can be trusted to 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security 
clearance depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a 
person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot 
function properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is 
in the best interest of the United States Government.  
 While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
It is deliberate if done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant did not provide full, complete, and accurate 
information concerning his delinquent accounts. Applicant’s failure to list all the 
delinquent debts is not intentional given his affirmative response to section 26 and the 
 
7 
 
 
fact that he listed accounts that he was paying. This appears to be his first clearance 
application. AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he responded “yes” to the personal conduct allegation, 
but I find that he did not intentionally fail to provide full, complete, and accurate 
information on his security clearance application. Omission alone is not sufficient in this 
case to find a falsification. Applicant listed two delinquent accounts and put the 
government on notice of his financial issues. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
unemployment and his intentions to pay his debts.  
 
 Applicant failed to show that he had a plan to pay his delinquent debts. In 
requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, he failed to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his financial circumstances, to adequately articulate his positions, and provide 
facts to mitigate the financial security concerns. In short, the file lacks sufficient 
evidence to establish that he paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or 
otherwise resolved his delinquent accounts. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantial documents and details to explain his finances. He omitted listing all 
delinquent debts, but he responded “yes” to financial issues and addressed two 
 
8 
 
 
accounts that he was making payments. He did not deliberately fail to report his debts 
on his SCA. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the government. He has not 
established his suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
situation. He did not falsify his security clearance application. I find for Applicant under 
personal conduct.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
NOREEN A. LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
