 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01355 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant filed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (Form SF-86) or 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) on December 12, 2014. On July 18, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant timely 
answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on December 6, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on December 16, 2016, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no 
response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 7, is 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 
2017.  
 
2 
 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in 1992, and his 
master’s degree in 1996. Applicant has been employed by a federal contractor as a 
computer scientist since October 2010. He reports no military service, and he was 
married in 1999 and filed for divorce in early 2015. Applicant had a previous secret 
security clearance from 2007.   
 
In his October 2016 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to his failure to timely 
file federal income tax returns for 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
He also admits to filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in January 2005, and having 
over $84,000 in secured and unsecured debt discharged in April, 2005, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. He also admits to all ten of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling 
$10,273, with explanations. These delinquencies relate to charged-off credit card or 
consumer debts or medical debt. Applicant ascribed ongoing-financial difficulties related 
to his divorce and his spouse’s gambling habits as the cause of his financial distress.  
 
Applicant disclosed his failure to file federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 
to 2013, as required, in section 26 of his December 2014 SCA.  He had unexplained 
challenges in e-filing his income tax returns. He also disclosed that he was already in a 
payment plan with the IRS concerning taxes owed from tax year 2006, with an 
outstanding balance of approximately $3,000. Applicant claimed to be current on 
payments for the 2006 back taxes owed.  He elaborated that for each of the tax years in 
question, Applicant requested an extension from IRS to file income tax returns late. 
However, he repeatedly missed the October 15 deadline from 2011 to 2014. He claims 
to have since filed these income tax returns late and states that he expected to receive 
refunds for each of those tax years. Applicant has provided no documentary evidence to 
confirm his late filing of these returns, or any other details.   
 
In section 26 of his 2014 SCA, in response to specific questions about his failure 
to file, Applicant repeatedly asserted “Have not taken any action. Do not have an 
explanation other than this is related to apathy. Intent is to file divorce this month….” He 
corroborated his inaction throughout his later clearance interview on December 14, 
2015. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that his wife over-drafted their joint 
checking account and emptied it in January 2013. This followed her exorbitant travel 
expenses to visit her ill parents in another state, starting around 2009. He stated that his 
divorce was final in 2016 and they expect to file for joint bankruptcy again by the end of 
2016. Applicant also stated that SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l, all resulted from his failure to 
return telecommunications equipment and that he would take care of it by the end of 
2016. Applicant produced no documents or other evidence to substantiate any of the 
aforementioned assertions in his SCA or Answer.   
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s December 12, 2014 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3); the summary of his interview with an OPM investigator on 
December 14, 2015 (Item 4); and his Answer to the SOR (Item 2). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.2 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
2 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
4 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
           (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income tax   
           returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and his clearance interview of December 2015. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.3 Applicant has not met that 
burden. Applicant did not provide corroborating documentation that he addressed his 
delinquent debts.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
 Applicant endured a divorce and related expenses. Arguably, these conditions 
were beyond his control. He has produced no documentation, either with his Answer to 
the SOR, or in response to the FORM. He has not demonstrated that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit reports and SOR 
list ten delinquent debts totaling over $10,000. Applicant did not provide enough details 
with documentary corroboration about what he did to address his SOR debts. He did not 
provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as 
checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor 
proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or 
from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;4 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a 
belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other 
evidence of progress or resolution such as tax transcripts. Applicant failed to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was necessary for 
him to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts on 
the SOR. (FORM at 3) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. He did not describe financial counseling or provide 
his budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 4) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                          
4 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case 
No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors 
and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has not produced any 
documents to meet his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:               Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                  Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                 Administrative Judge 
 
