 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00517 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:  
 
This is a security clearance case in which the Appeal Board remanded for further 
processing. In my initial June 7, 2017 decision I concluded that Applicant had a history 
of financial problems or difficulties consisting of a past-due mortgage loan, charged-off 
credit card accounts, and back taxes owed to state and federal tax authorities for 
multiple tax years. I further concluded that he made sufficient progress in resolving the 
debt associated with the past-due mortgage loan and charged-off credit card accounts, 
but his tax problems were too much, went on too long, and were too recent to justify a 
favorable clearance decision. 
 
The Appeal Board remanded the case to give the parties an opportunity to 
address the potential applicability of a mitigating condition now found at AG ¶ 20(g) 
under Guideline F for financial considerations.1 That particular mitigating condition was 
not in effect under Guideline F when the SOR was issued in May 2016, when the 
hearing was conducted in October 2016, when post-hearing matters were submitted in 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 16-00517 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 8, 2017). 
 
 
2 
 
November and December 2016, and when the case was decided on June 7, 2017. 
Stated differently, my initial decision was based on then current law, policies, and 
standards applicable to a security clearance case. In remanding the case, the Appeal 
Board concluded that the failure to address AG ¶ 20(g) was not attributed to error on my 
part.2   
 
The mitigating condition now found at AG ¶ 20(g) came into effect on June 8, 
2017, per Security Executive Agent Directive 4, which implemented the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position. The new mitigating condition 
provides as follows: “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”  
 
It is my view that the addition of AG ¶ 20(g) is not a sea change to Guideline F 
cases. Its addition simply codified existing practice within DOHA, because we routinely 
considered whether an applicant had made an arrangement with the relevant tax 
authority and was in compliance with that arrangement. In applying AG ¶ 20(g), both the 
timing and length of compliance are questions of fact to be addressed on a case-by-
case basis.  
 
I had a conference call with counsel on September 28, 2017. During the call, I 
directed the submission of written briefs to address the issue of the potential 
applicability of the mitigating condition now found at AG ¶ 20(g). The written briefs are 
made part of the record as Appellate Exhibits I and II.  
 
After reviewing the briefs, I conclude the mitigating condition now found at AG ¶ 
20(g) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. In particular, I conclude that 
Applicant made no arrangement with the IRS to pay the back taxes. Instead, the back 
taxes were being collected via a tax levy or garnishment of his spouse’s federal salary. 
In other words, it was the IRS that made an arrangement to collect the back taxes. 
Likewise, he had only just begun, in October or November 2016, the process of paying 
the back taxes owed to the state, which is too recent to conclude that he was in 
compliance with the payment arrangement. Accordingly, for the reasons discussed in 
my June 7, 2017 decision, which is adopted and incorporated herein, this case is 
decided against Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 16-00517 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 8, 2017).  
 
