 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01149 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline K (Handling Protected 
Information) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 15, 2015. On 
June 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines K and E.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 13, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM) dated October 6, 
2016, was submitted by Department Counsel. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 18, 2016. He submitted a 
response to the FORM, marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The Government’s exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 3) and AE A are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on July 3, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old senior program manager for a defense contractor, 
employed since 1981. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 1981 and a master’s 
degree in 1995. He is currently married but separated, and is living in the same residence 
with his spouse while his son attends college. He has held a security clearance since 
2001. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant had various security violations. In 2012 he took a cell 
phone into a secure sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF) and was verbally 
warned; in 2014 he allowed a colleague into the SCIF to shred computer parts without 
proper authorization and was verbally warned; in 2015 he took an electronic personal 
fitness device into the SCIF and was verbally warned; and in 2015 he escorted an 
employee into a classified meeting in which the employee did not have the appropriate 
clearance. Applicant was given a written reprimand. The same allegations were cross-
alleged under Guideline E, and Applicant is also alleged to have intentionally falsified his 
April 2015 security clearance reapplication by not reporting his past verbal warnings as 
under section 13C (Employment Record) of the SCA. SOR ¶ 2.b should have alleged the 
falsification allegations under SCA section 13A, where Applicant listed his current 
employment, rather than section 13C, which applies to employment activities not 
previously listed. Both sections request applicant’s to report whether they have received 
a “written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct 
in the workplace, such as violation of a security policy.” Applicant admitted the SOR 
allegations under Guideline K, but denied the allegations under Guideline E. 
 
Applicant explained in his answer to the SOR, that in 2012, he mistakenly entered 
the SCIF with a cell phone; and in early 2015, he entered the SCIF wearing a personal 
fitness bracelet. He noted that the fitness bracelet was a new item and he was unaware 
that it was prohibited in the SCIF. He received verbal warnings on each occasion from his 
facility security officer (FSO). He noted that he now double-checks himself for any 
electronic devices before entering the SCIF. 
 
In 2014, Applicant allowed another employee into the SCIF without the proper 
security access, to use a specialized shredder to grind computer parts as required by a 
government contract. This shredder was the only one available for the type of shredding 
necessary. He noted that the employee did not view any classified information in the 
 
3 
 
space, but that he should have obtained prior permission from the FSO so that the space 
could be cleared and its use could be properly coordinated. He received a verbal warning 
from the FSO. 
 
In June 2015, Applicant escorted another employee, into the SCIF to attend a 
classified customer meeting in place of another engineer that regularly attended the 
meeting. Applicant assumed the employee had the proper security clearance, but was 
later informed by the FSO that his clearance was “in process” at the time, and that 
Applicant should have required the employee to verify his clearance before entering the 
meeting. Applicant received a written reprimand. The written reprimand was not entered 
into the record herein. 
 
When Applicant completed his April 2015 SCA, he did not report the verbal security 
violation warnings he received in 2012, 2014, and early 2015 in sections 13A or 13C. 
Applicant noted that when he completed section 13 of the SCA, he did not believe the 
question required him to report “verbal warnings” as he did not interpret them to fall within 
the requirement to report “written warnings” or “official reprimands.” During his personal 
subject interview (PSI) by a government investigator, he disclosed and discussed each 
of the verbal warnings. He has since acknowledged his misunderstanding and noted that 
he had no intent to withhold disclosure of the events in his clearance application.2 
 
Applicant acknowledged his security violations, is current on all security training, 
and vowed to remain incident free by thoroughly checking himself for electronic devices 
before entering the SCIF and using proper entry procedures. He stated that he has a 
positive attitude about security, and has not had any further incidents since 2015. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. My ultimate 
decision would be the same under either set of adjudicative guidelines. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
                                                     
2 The June 2015 incident resulting in a written reprimand occurred after he completed the April 2015 SCA.  
 
4 
 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K: Handling Protected Information 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the handling protected information security concern: 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
Relevant conditions that could raise a security concern under AG ¶ 34 and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 The Applicant’s security violations are sufficient to implicate disqualifying security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 34 (a), (g), and (h). 
 
Relevant conditions that could mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 35 include: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or 
unclear instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant has been employed with the same defense contractor since 1981, and 
has held a security clearance since 2001. He has had four security incidents during that 
time. Two of which were relatively minor; mistakenly taking a cell phone and fitness 
bracelet into a SCIF. He also did not follow proper procedures to allow employees without 
the proper clearance access to the SCIF. Three of these events in 2012, 2014 and 2015, 
resulted in verbal warnings, but not more serious written  warnings, official reprimands, 
or disciplinary action. The June 2015 incident where a substitute employee without the 
proper access was allowed to attend a classified meeting resulted in the only written 
reprimand that Applicant has received. Applicant acknowledged his security lapses and 
vowed to check himself more thoroughly for electronic devices before entering the SCIF. 
He also vowed to ensure anyone he escorts into the secured facility has the proper 
access. He has completed all required security training, has a positive attitude about 
security, and there have been no further security incidents since 2015. AG ¶¶ 35 (a), (b), 
and (d) apply. 
 
Guideline E; Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: 
 
 
 
7 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
. . .  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; . . . 
 
The allegations alleged under Guideline K that are cross-alleged under Guideline 
E (SOR ¶ 2.a) are specifically covered under Guideline K, and therefore AG ¶ 16(d) is not 
applicable. However, the conduct may implicate AG ¶ 16(e). 
 
Applicant did not intentionally falsify his SCA by not disclosing verbal security 
warnings under section 13C, as alleged, or under section 13A as it should have been 
alleged. The relevant questions are ambiguous with regard to verbal warnings, and 
Applicant’s belief that the warnings did not rise to the level of “written warnings” or an 
“official reprimand” is plausible. I find that he did not intentionally falsify his SCA, however 
both Guideline E allegations have been mitigated. 
 
Guideline E includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and 
found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
Applicant has been employed with the same defense contractor since 1981, and 
has held a security clearance since 2001. He has had four security incidents during that 
time. Two of which were relatively minor and two involved not following proper procedures 
to allow employees into a classified space. Applicant acknowledged his security lapses, 
 
8 
 
and vowed to check himself more thoroughly for electronic devices before entering the 
SCIF. He also vowed to ensure anyone he escorts into the secured facility has the proper 
access. With regard to completing his SCA, Applicant now acknowledges that he should 
have disclosed the security warnings in his SCA, but did not intend to withhold information 
from the government but that he will address the matter differently in the future. 
Additionally, he fully disclosed and discussed the incidents in his PSI with a government 
investigator. He has completed all required security training, has a positive attitude about 
security, and there have been no further security incidents since 2015. AG ¶ 17(c) and 
(d) apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact 
and comments under Guidelines K and E in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a 
mature employee with many years of handling classified information in sensitive spaces, 
and his work has contributed to the national defense. He has acknowledged his security 
lapses and understands how he should complete his SCA going forward. He has taken 
appropriate steps to ensure that he has no further security incidents, completed required 
security training, takes extra effort to ensure he has complied with all security rules and 
procedures, and has a positive attitude. He has not had an additional incident since 2015. 
The favorable record evidence is sufficient to fully mitigate the security concerns raised 
in the SOR, and the personal conduct concerns are mitigated or are not applicable as 
discussed above.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information. Accordingly, I 
conclude Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
9 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security to grant continued 
eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
