 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-00904 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
financial situation. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the administrative (written) 
record (Answer).  
 
 On December 13, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant seven exhibits (Items 1 – 7) that the Government offers 
for admission into the record. Applicant submitted a response to the FORM on February 
13, 2017, explaining, in part, that his financial problems were related to an expensive and 
contentious divorce. He also stated that he had taken action to address his financial 
situation by filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (Response) 
 
 On October 1, 2017, I was assigned the case for decision. I reopened the record 
to give the parties the opportunity to submit updated information. Applicant timely 
 
2 
 
submitted a number of documents showing that his Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan was 
confirmed by a court and that he is paying per the terms of the plan. He also submitted 
documents about his military service, 12 years of performance evaluations at his job, and 
reference letters. I (re-)marked these documents Applicant’s Exhibits A – K. All exhibits 
were admitted into the record without objection, and the record closed on October 6, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 38, earned a high school diploma in 1997 and then enlisted in the U.S. 
military. He earned several awards and medals for his military service, and was promoted 
to the rank of sergeant (E-5) before receiving an honorable discharge in 2005. After 
leaving the military, Applicant was hired by his current employer. He was granted a 
security clearance while in the military, which he has retained to the present day. 1  
 
Applicant started experiencing financial trouble in approximately mid-2013, when 
his wife decided to change careers. This resulted in a substantial reduction in their 
household income. Applicant’s ex-wife went from earning about $38,000 annually to 
$16,000. Applicant attempted to make up the financial shortfall by working overtime. By 
April 2014, he was no longer able to afford the monthly mortgage payments on their 
marital residence and other marital debts.2  
 
Applicant then attempted to resolve the mortgage debt by selling his former home. 
He had purchased the home at the height of the housing market bubble in 2008. By 2014, 
the home was still worth less than the balance owed on the mortgage. The bank rejected 
several short-sale offers and, in 2015, foreclosed on the property. A 1099-A reflects that, 
at the time the home was foreclosed, Applicant and his wife owed about $30,000 more 
than the home was worth.  
 
Applicant self-reported the mortgage defaulted and foreclosure to his facility 
security officer (FSO). He kept his FSO informed about his financial problems, and 
discussed them during the course of a recent security clearance background 
investigation.3 
 
Around the time of the foreclosure in 2015, Applicant and his wife formally 
separated. Applicant then sought the advice of a bankruptcy attorney. He was advised to 
not pay his debts, including the two listed on the SOR totaling $33,000. He was also 
advised by the attorney to wait until after his divorce was finalized to file for bankruptcy.  
 
In September 2016, a divorce decree was issued. Applicant then took the 
necessary pre-bankruptcy financial counseling, gathered the necessary financial 
documents, and set aside enough money to pay the bankruptcy attorney’s retainer fee.  
                                                          
1 Answer; Response; Item 3; Exhibits A, B, D (military awards and decorations); I (DD 214). 
 
2 Answer; Response; Item 4; Exhibits A and B.  
 
3 Answer; Response; Item 4; Item 7; Exhibit C (1099-A).  
 
3 
 
In February 2017, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He listed the two SOR 
debts on his bankruptcy petition. The proposed Chapter 13 plan was confirmed in April 
2017. Applicant submitted documentation showing that he has made eight consecutive 
$200 monthly payments per the terms of the court-approved bankruptcy plan.4 
 
Applicant is required, as a separate condition of the court-approved 60-month 
bankruptcy plan, to surrender two time shares. He is also required over the next five years 
to submit his income tax returns to the bankruptcy trustee, and remit any tax refunds 
exceeding $1,200 to the trustee to distribute to his creditors as supplemental plan 
payments. He has completed an additional financial counseling course.5  
 
Applicant earned an associate’s degree in 2010. He is currently attending college 
in pursuit of a degree in electrical engineering, which he is a few credits shy of earning. 
His performance evaluations over the past 12 years are favorable. His supervisors write 
that Applicant exhibits a strong work ethic, is trustworthy, and is of high moral character. 
They further note that Applicant never shies away from doing extra work and is a team 
player. Co-workers agree with the supervisors’ assessment that Applicant is a hard 
worker, dependable, and a person of good moral character.6  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
                                                          
4 Answer; Response; Item 4; Exhibit E (bankruptcy petition and order confirming plan); Exhibit F (plan 
payments); Exhibit G (counseling). 
 
5 Exhibit E at 73-88; Exhibit G. 
 
6 Item 4; Exhibits J; Exhibit K. 
 
4 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.7 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
 Applicant started experiencing financial trouble about three years ago, when his 
marriage started falling apart. His former wife’s decision to start a new career, which 
reduced her income by more than half, became a source of great financial strain. 
Applicant was unable to keep up with the payments on their home and the other debts 
that they had jointly acquired during the marriage. He tried to resolve the mortgage by 
selling his former home, but was unable to find a buyer willing to offer enough to cover 
                                                          
7 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Likewise, a judge can only use non-alleged conduct for specific 
limited purposes, such as, assessing mitigation and credibility, unless an applicant is placed on notice that 
such conduct also raises a security concern. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
 
the amount remaining on the mortgage. The bank refused several short-sell offers and 
eventually foreclosed on the property.  
 
 Applicant then took action to resolve his financial problems. He sought the advice 
of a bankruptcy attorney, obtained the necessary financial counseling, and is responsibly 
addressing his past financial problems through a court-approved Chapter 13 plan. He 
submitted documentary proof showing a track record of debt repayments per the terms 
of the court-approved bankruptcy plan. Nonetheless, Applicant’s recent problems raise 
the Guideline F security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .8  
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or 
irresponsible spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, 
or other negative financial indicators; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (… divorce or separation . . .), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In a Guideline F case, 
an administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles his or her personal 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
financial obligations to assess how they may handle their security obligations.9 
Additionally, the resolution of past financial issues alone without evidence of true reform 
and rehabilitation is of limited probative value in the security clearance context.10  
 
Here, Applicant’s past financial problems were, in part, attributable to the 
dissolution of his marriage. He immediately reported his financial problems to his FSO 
and kept his FSO in the loop. He then took responsible action to address his financial 
problems. He received financial counseling and is adhering to a court-approved debt 
repayment plan. Although Applicant is still in the process of repairing his finances, his 
current financial situation does not raise a concern about his suitability for a security 
clearance. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply, in full or in part, and when considered 
together with the positive whole-person matters raised by the record evidence,11 mitigate 
the security concerns at issue. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
10 Compare, ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (despite the presence of unresolved debt, 
notably, a second mortgage loan tied to a property that had been foreclosed, Board upheld grant because 
clear evidence of reform and rehabilitation), with, ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) 
(applicant’s resolution of alleged financial issue (overdue tax returns) insufficient to mitigate security 
concerns, because no extenuating circumstances to explain issue or evidence of true financial reform). 
 
11 See generally AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
