 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-01761  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 12, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant owes more than $394,893 in unresolved consumer, educational, and 
medical debt. Additionally, he failed to pay his 2009 and 2010 Federal income taxes, and 
his 2010 state income taxes. He further failed to file his 2012 and 2013 Federal and state 
income tax returns or pay the resulting taxes, as required. Resulting security concerns 
were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 3, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. (Item 
3.) On September 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 5, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
January 27, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on January 30, 2017, and received by him on February 14, 2017. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection 
to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period 
he was afforded. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into the record. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG promulgated in SEAD 
4. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is married. He earned a doctorate degree in 
December 2005. He has worked for his current employer, a Federal contractor, since 
March 2014. He previously held a security clearance in connection with prior employment 
by another government contractor. (Item 3.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.j, with some explanations, and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.dd. (Item 
2.) His delinquent debts are also documented in record credit bureau reports from 2014 
and 2016. (Items 4 and 5.)  
 
 Applicant reported on his security clearance application, and confirmed in his 
answer to the SOR, that he failed to pay his 2009 and 2010 Federal income taxes and 
his 2010 state income taxes as required, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He further 
failed to file his 2012 and 2013 Federal and state income tax returns or pay the resulting 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
taxes, as required, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. He claimed that he had paid his 
2009 and 2010 Federal income tax debt in full and was setting up payments on his 
remaining state and Federal tax debts. He claimed to have “recently” filed all delinquent 
tax returns. However, he failed to provide documentation to substantiate his claims. (Item 
2; Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant admitted he was indebted on a judgment entered against him in 2011 in 
the amount of $152,345, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. He claimed in his Answer: 
 
The creditor had told me that they had withdrawn the request for judgment 
and that I did not need to respond to the court. The creditor behaved as if 
this were the case an[d] treated the loan as if it were a standard student 
loan. I have subsequently had the creditor move to withdraw the judgment 
and am repaying the debt under the terms of the original loan. (Item 2.) 
 
However, Applicant failed to present any documentation to support his claim. This debt is 
unresolved. (Item 2; Item 4; Item 5 at 6.)   
 
 Applicant admitted he was indebted on a delinquent mortgage account in the 
amount of $11,920, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. This debt became delinquent in 
approximately 2015. He claimed that he had restructured the mortgage under a 
government home preservation plan. However, he failed to produce documentation to 
support his claim. This debt is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 4; Item 5 at 1.) 
 
 Applicant admitted he was indebted on a delinquent credit-card account in the 
amount of $6,493, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt has been delinquent since 2013. 
Applicant claimed this debt was charged off by the creditor in 2014. He claimed that he 
entered into a repayment plan with this creditor. However, at the end of the repayment 
plan, he “was informed that there was a large remaining balance.” (Item 2.) He was unable 
to pay that remaining balance at that time. He claimed to have disputed the remaining 
balance, as he believed that the repayment plan would satisfy the debt. Applicant 
provided no documentation of payments made under the repayment plan, or other action 
taken on this debt. It remains unresolved. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 4; Item 5 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant admitted he was indebted to a university in the amount of $4,663, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. He indicated that he intended to repay this debt, but had not yet 
been able to address it. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 5.) It remains unresolved.  
 
 Applicant admitted he was indebted on a collection account in the amount of 
$4,365, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt was placed for collections in 2011. He stated, 
“This is an old debt. It is no longer collectable. Given my current situation it is a low priority 
to address this debt.” (Item 2; Item 4; Item 5.) It is unresolved. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant admitted he was indebted on a delinquent credit-card account in the 
amount of $4,277, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. In his Answer, he indicated he had not yet 
addressed this debt. This debt is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant denied he was indebted on the 20 delinquent medical debts totaling 
approximately $3,215, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.dd. Applicant claimed that “at the 
time of service” his medical provider told him that he was “in network,” but later informed 
Applicant that he was not in network and tried to charge Applicant a different amount. 
Applicant claimed that he disputed the debt, but produced no documentation to support 
his claim. (Item 2; Item.) They remain unresolved. 
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling or provide budget information 
from which to predict his future solvency. He offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning his character or trustworthiness, the quality of his professional performance, 
the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling 
sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent adjudicative guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant was unable or unwilling to repay all of his alleged delinquencies. These 
financial issues date back to 2011, and continue to date. He has not documented that his 
Federal and state tax returns for 2012 and 2013 have been filed, or that he has payment 
arrangements with the Federal or state taxation authorities for his delinquent taxes. Four 
of his unresolved debts involve less than $60. These facts establish prima facie support 
for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the 
resulting security concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file and pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant continues to owe more than $390,000 for debts that became delinquent 
beginning in 2011. He claimed, but did not document, that he had resolved his delinquent 
 
 
7 
 
 
Federal tax debt from 2009 and 2010. He offered no reasonable basis to conclude that 
such problems will not recur, so mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant neither asserted nor documented that his delinquent debts arose from 
conditions that were beyond his control, or that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He also failed to provide 
evidence of financial counseling or efforts to resolve the debts that could establish 
mitigation under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Applicant claimed he disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, and 1.k through 
1.dd. However, he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of his 
dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Application of AG ¶ 20(e) is 
not supported by the facts.  
 
Applicant claimed he was making arrangements with the state and Federal tax 
authorities to pay the amounts owed, but provided no documentation to substantiate any 
payment arrangements. He did not provide documentation of having filed his delinquent 
tax returns. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(g).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $390,000 in delinquent 
debt that he has accumulated since 2011, and either cannot or chooses not to repay. The 
potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress from his financial situation remains 
undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
 
 
8 
 
 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.dd:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
