 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03374 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 14, 2017, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on April 17, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on April 26, 2017. He did not respond to the Government’s FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. The Government exhibits included in 
the FORM are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. He is a 43-year-
old employee of a defense contractor. He obtained a high-school diploma in 1994 and 
bachelor’s and master’s degrees at a date not in the record. He previously worked for 
three defense contractors from March 2005 to April 2013, with a period of 
unemployment from January to October 2009.  He has worked for his current employer 
since April 2013. He was first granted a DOD security clearance in March 2006. He is 
not legally married, but his cohabitant is his common-law spouse, and they have three 
minor children.2  
 
The SOR alleges two delinquent mortgage-related debts for a home Applicant 
purchased in March 2005, comprised of a second mortgage account placed for 
collection and a charged-off home equity line of credit. Applicant discussed the debts in 
his January 2016 security clearance application, May 2016 subject interview, and March 
2017 response to the SOR.3 
 
Applicant attributes his delinquent mortgage-related debts to losing his job in 
January 2009 and his subsequent nine-month period of unemployment. He exhausted 
his savings to try to maintain his mortgage payments and he stopped paying his 
mortgage in May 2009. In October 2009, when he obtained another job, he tried to 
negotiate with his creditors to refinance his home and make a payment plan. His 
creditors told him not to make any payments until they could determine an amount that 
included late fees. He continued to make improvements on his home because he 
thought he could keep it. Despite his submission of requested documentation 
concerning proof of income, the creditors foreclosed on his home in March 2012.4  
 
 Credit reports from February 2011 and January 2016 report SOR ¶ 1.b as 
charged-off, with a high credit of $58,702, and a zero balance. The January 2016 credit 
report lists SOR ¶ 1.a. Credit reports from March 2017 from the three major credit 
bureaus, provided by Applicant with his response to the SOR, do not report SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b; they report a clean credit file for Applicant. In addition, they report that 
                                                          
2 Items 1, 2, 5.  
 
3 Items 1, 2, 5.  
 
4 Items 1, 2, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant opened a mortgage account in June 2016, was current on his payments of 
$1,677 monthly, and his balance as of March 2017 was $280,000.5  
 
Applicant indicated that he has continued to live within his means and he has 
increased his emergency savings to sustain one years’ worth of his living expenses. He 
has also put more money into his retirement plan. He does not intend to find himself in a 
similar financial situation in the future.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Items 1, 3, 4. 
 
6 Items 1, 5. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
Conditions beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial problems. 
Credit reports from February 2011 and January 2016 report SOR ¶ 1.b with a zero 
balance. Credit reports from March 2017 do not report SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and report a 
clean credit file for Applicant. A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an 
 
5 
 
individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection 
procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). AG ¶ 20(a) applies and 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia  
Administrative Judge 
