 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-02741 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his debts. He also 
deliberately omitted adverse information about his finances from his security clearance 
application. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On November 23, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
 
 On January 6, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns under the adjudicative guidelines2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F), personal conduct (Guideline E), and criminal conduct 
(Guideline J). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
hearing.  
 
 I received the case on March 21, 2017, and I convened the requested hearing on 
June 15, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered two 
items identified as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant testified but produced no 
documents at hearing. I held the record open after the hearing to receive additional 
relevant information from Applicant. He timely submitted documents identified as 
Applicant Exhibits (Ax.) A and B.3 I admitted each party’s exhibits without objection.4 I 
received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 27, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $13,324 for 12 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.l). SOR 1.a addresses an unpaid state tax 
lien perfected in 2008, and SOR 1.f, 1.h, 1.i and 1.l are for unpaid medical bills. In 
response, Applicant admitted SOR 1.e, 1.g, 1.h and 1.k. He denied the remaining 
Guideline F allegations.  (Answer; Tr. 11 - 12) 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately made  a 
false official statement to the Government when he answered “no” to questions in e-QIP 
Section 26 (Financial Record), thereby omitting the debts alleged at SOR 1.a – 1.l. 
(SOR 2.a). The Government further alleged that Applicant deliberately made  a false 
official statement to the Government when he answered “no” to questions in e-QIP 
Section 22 (Police Record) by omitting two drug-related arrests in 1996 and 2003, as 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 Ax. B is a link to an on-line credit management account proffered to show a record of debt payments. 
Unfortunately, the account link required an account name and password that Applicant did not provide. I 
have admitted this exhibit; however, I have assigned it minimal weight. 
  
4 A copy of Department Counsel’s January 19, 2017 “discovery letter” and a Government Exhibit List also 
are included as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I and II, respectively. 
 
 
3 
 
 
addressed in the Guideline J allegations in SOR 3.a and 3.b. (SOR 2.b) Applicant 
denied both Guideline E allegations. (Answer) 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government alleged that in 1996, Applicant was charged 
with possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia (SOR 3.a); and in 2003, he was 
charged with possession of drug paraphernalia (SOR 3.b). Applicant denied both 
allegations. At hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw both Guideline J 
allegations, and to amend SOR 2.b to specifically identify the charges outlined in SOR 
3.a and 3.b. Without objection, I granted the motion. (Answer; Tr. 13 – 15). 
 
 In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions to SOR 1.e, 1.g, 1.h 
and 1.k, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He and his wife have been married since December 
1998. Since 2001, Applicant has worked for at least eight different companies as a long 
haul truck driver. He has been with his current employer since 2015 and now requires a 
clearance to work on DOD contracts. (Gx. 1; Tr. 49) 
 
 The Government produced a credit report that documents all of the debts alleged 
in the SOR. The debt at SOR 1.a is for a state tax lien for the 2008 tax year. It remains 
unresolved. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he also owes at least $1,000 to the 
IRS for taxes from 2014. He did not file his state and federal returns for 2014 until 
sometime in 2016. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 31, 33 – 37) 
 
 The medical debts at SOR 1.f, 1.h, 1.i and 1.l stem from a medical procedure 
while employed with insufficient medical insurance in 2014. Applicant has been aware 
of those delinquencies because he was receiving collection notices seeking repayment. 
(Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 52) 
 
 Applicant attributed his other debts to poor financial management, but claims he 
is now well aware of the importance of meeting his financial obligations. During 
testimony, Applicant claimed he has recently arranged with several creditors to begin 
monthly payment plans. He also claimed he has been making monthly payments on 
some of his debts. Applicant did not provide any documents to corroborate these 
claims. Any actions he has taken to resolve his debts have occurred in the six months 
before his hearing. (Tr. 28, 31, 37 – 38, 46 – 47, 50 – 51) 
 
 In early 2017, Applicant retained the services of a firm specializing in credit repair 
and negotiating with creditors. That firm has reported to Applicant that the debts at SOR 
1.b, 1.d, 1.i and 1.j have been removed from his credit history. Applicant has not 
received any actual credit or financial counseling from that firm. Applicant pays the firm 
$100 each month for their services. (Ax. A; Tr. 38 - 40) 
 
 Applicant testified he has incurred no new debts and that he has enough money 
to meet all of his current expenses. He sometimes provides modest financial support for 
 
 
4 
 
 
his children and grandchildren. A month before the hearing, Applicant was able to 
purchase outright a parcel of undeveloped land, on which to build a house, for about 
$10,000. He did not explain why he did not decide to pay off some of his delinquent 
debts before making such a large purchase. (Tr. 40 – 45) 
 
 In 1996 and 2003, Applicant was charged with minor drug-related offenses. Both 
times the charges were dismissed. Applicant was required to disclose both charges in 
e-QIP Section 22, which places no time limit on reporting of drug or alcohol offenses. 
He averred that he thought he did not have to report the charges because of the 
passage of time and because he misunderstood the questions. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Tr. XX) 
 
 Applicant also did not disclose any of the past-due debts or the state tax lien 
alleged in the SOR. When he completed his e-QIP, he was aware of most of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. Although not alleged, Applicant acknowledged information in his 
credit history that shows he and his wife lost a home to foreclosure in 2013. He also did 
not disclose that information. Applicant did not provide any plausible explanations for his 
omissions in response to e-QIP Section 26 questions. (Answer; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 30, 50, 
52) 
  
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information.  
 
                                                 
5 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 A security clearance decision resolves only whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have access to 
classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible 
information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
                                                 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
financial obligations). Available information documented the SOR allegations that 
Applicant owes or owed a significant level of past-due or delinquent debt. Most of that 
debt remains unresolved. 
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are recent and 
continuing. As to AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant did not establish that his debts arose from 
circumstances beyond his control. Even allowing for unplanned medical expenses 
caused by insufficient insurance coverage, Applicant did not establish that he has acted 
responsibly in the face of such unexpected obligations.  
 
As to AG ¶ 20(c), Applicant has retained the services of a credit repair firm and 
several accounts have been removed from his credit history; however, the reasons for 
their removal was not provided. He did not present information that reflects actual 
counseling or other professional assistance to improve his personal financial 
management practices. Further, he did not clearly establish that his financial problems 
are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Finally, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Although Applicant may have resolved 
several debts through removal from his credit history, he did not do so in a timely 
manner indicative of responsibly meeting one’s obligations. Applicant’s efforts to resolve 
his debts started only a few months before the hearing. As to his claims of payment or 
establishment of payment plans, Applicant was afforded time after the hearing to 
document those claims. He did not do so.   
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has recently started to address his delinquent debts; however, he has 
not established a reliable record of fiscal responsibility that inspires confidence that his 
financial problems are under control and will not recur. On balance, Applicant has failed 
to mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s information. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant did not disclose any of his past-due or delinquent debts when he 
submitted his e-QIP. He also did not disclose two drug-related arrests as required. 
Applicant denied any intent to mislead the Government. Applicant’s explanation of his 
omission of drug-related arrests was likely a result of mistake. The charges (both of 
which were minor infractions and were dismissed) were so remote in time that it was 
reasonable for him to think they need not be reported.  
 
 That is not the case with the omission of his delinquent debts. Applicant was well 
aware of his financial problems when he completed the e-QIP. He has not provided a 
plausible explanation for why he did not list any of his debts. The Government 
established through sufficient circumstantial evidence that his omissions in e-QIP 
Section 26 were intentional. This information raises a security concern about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness expressed at AG ¶ 15: 
 
  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
  deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 I have also considered the following AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions that are 
pertinent in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
 
 
8 
 
 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 As to AG ¶ 17(a), Applicant did not establish that he attempted to correct his 
omissions in a timely manner. To be fair, however, the record does not reflect that 
investigators interviewed Applicant during his background investigation. Such interviews 
often offer applicants their first opportunity to correct or at least explain their omissions.  
 
AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. Applicant did not establish that his negative answers 
resulted from improper advice.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because intentional false statements are not minor 
offenses. Applicant’s submission of his e-QIP was his first interaction with the 
Government’s attempt to assess his suitability for access to classified information. In 
addition to demonstrating his hesitation to be fully candid with the Government about 
adverse information in his background, Applicant’s false statements potentially violate 
federal law (18 U.S.C. § 1001). On balance, available information is not sufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s actions to resolve his debts are recent and not sufficient to 
satisfy the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Information about his 
omissions of adverse information from his e-QIP further sustains doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment and trustworthiness. Because protection of the national interest is 
the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against 
granting eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
