1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 16-03126 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant pleaded guilty to a lesser charge following her arrest in April 2004 for 
driving while intoxicated (DWI). She was convicted of an April 2015 DWI, for which she 
served 12 months of community supervision and was fined.  She incurred delinquent debt 
after a 2006 bankruptcy that has been discharged in a 2016 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
Concerns persist about her alcohol consumption and her financial judgment. Clearance is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On October 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The SOR explained why the DOD CAF was unable to find it clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for 
Applicant. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
REDACTED
2 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On November 4, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
decision on the written record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On December 21, 2016, the Government submitted a File 
of Relevant Material (FORM), consisting of 11 exhibits (Items 1-11). DOHA forwarded a 
copy of the FORM to Applicant on December 22, 2016, and instructed her to respond 
within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on January 3, 2017. She submitted 
a response (“supplemental answer”) on January 30, 2017, to which the Government had 
no objections. On October 1, 2017, I was assigned the case to determine whether it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. I accepted Applicant’s supplemental answer as an Applicant exhibit (AE A). 
  
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel submitted as Item 4 a summary of an unsworn subject 
interview of Applicant conducted on September 23, 2013. This document was part of the 
DOD Report of Investigation (ROI) in Applicant’s case. Under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive, a 
DOD personnel background report of investigation may be received in evidence and 
considered with an authenticating witness, provided it is otherwise admissible under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence. The interview summary did not bear the authentication required 
for admissibility under AG ¶ E3.1.20. 
 
 In ISCR Case No. 15-01807 decided on April 19, 2017, the Appeal Board held that it 
was not error for an administrative judge to admit and consider a summary of personal 
subject interview in the absence of any objection to it or any indication that it contained 
inaccurate information. The applicant in that case had objected on appeal to the accuracy 
of some of the information in a FORM, but had not objected to the interview summary or 
indicated that it was inaccurate in any aspects when she responded to the FORM. 
 
 Applicant submitted a supplemental answer in which she provided facts for 
consideration in mitigation. She filed no objections to the interview summary even though 
she was provided a copy of the FORM and advised of her opportunity to submit objections 
or material that she wanted the administrative judge to consider. In a footnote, the FORM 
advised Applicant of the following: 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
 
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO APPLICANT: The attached summary of your 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) (Item 4) is being provided to the 
Administrative Judge for consideration as part of the record evidence in this 
case. In your response to this File of Relevant Material (FORM), you can 
comment on whether [the] PSI summary accurately reflects the information 
you provided to the authorized OPM investigator(s) and you can make any 
corrections, additions, deletions, and updates necessary to make the 
summary clear and accurate. Alternatively, you may object on the ground 
that the report is unauthenticated by a Government witness and the 
document may not be considered as evidence. If no objections are raised in 
your response to the FORM, or if you do not respond to the FORM, the 
Administrative Judge may determine that you have waived any objections to 
the admissibility of the summary and may consider the summary as evidence 
in your case. 
 
 Concerning whether Applicant understood the meaning of authentication or the legal 
consequences of waiver, Applicant’s pro se status does not confer any due process rights 
or protections beyond those afforded her if she was represented by legal counsel. She was 
advised in ¶ E3.1.4 of the Directive that she may request a hearing. In ¶ E3.1.15, she was 
advised that she is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, or mitigate facts 
admitted by her or proven by Department Counsel and that she has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision. While the Directive does not 
specifically provide for a waiver of the authentication requirement, Applicant was placed on 
sufficient notice of her opportunity to object to the admissibility of the interview summary, to 
comment on the interview summary, and to make any corrections, deletions, or updates to 
the information in the report. She was advised that if she did not respond, the interview 
summary may be considered as evidence in her case. Applicant filed no objections to any 
of the information in the interview summary. I cannot presume without any evidence that 
Applicant failed to understand her due process rights or obligations under the Directive or 
that she did not want the summary of her interview considered in her case. Accordingly, I 
accepted Item 4 in the record, subject to issues of relevance and materiality in light of the 
entire record, including Applicant’s admissions to some of the allegations in the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline G that Applicant pleaded guilty to an April 2015 
DWI (SOR ¶ 1.a) and to an April 2004 offense of obstructing a highway passageway 
following her arrest for DWI (SOR ¶ 1.b). Under Guideline F, Applicant was in Chapter 7 
bankruptcy proceedings as of October 2016 (SOR ¶ 2.a) after having been granted a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in February 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.b). She was also alleged to 
owe three delinquent debts totaling $22,183 (SOR ¶¶ 2.c-2.e). When she answered the 
SOR allegations, Applicant admitted that she pleaded guilty to the April 2015 DWI but 
explained that she had complied with all court orders. She admitted that she had been 
arrested for DWI in April 2004, but she was not convicted of the charge. Applicant did not 
dispute the debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.c-2.e, which were included in her 2016 Chapter 7 
4 
 
bankruptcy discharge. She indicated that she filed for the 2006 because a roommate had 
moved and left her with the bills when she had bills of her own from a past relationship. 
After considering the FORM, which includes Applicant’s Answer to the SOR as Item 2, and 
Applicant’s supplemental answer (AE A), I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old high school graduate, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since February 1997. (Item 2.) She currently works as a material 
coordinator, and she has held a DOD secret clearance since July 1998. In September 
2013, Applicant began taking a night class at a junior college. (Item 4.) Applicant has one 
child, a daughter now age 10, from her second marriage, which lasted from May 2006 to 
January 2012. Applicant was married to her first husband from December 1997 to 
September 1998. (Item 3.) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 On August 27, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) to renew her security clearance 
eligibility. She responded “No” to a police record inquiry concerning whether she had ever 
been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. She responded negatively to an 
alcohol-use inquiry concerning whether she had ever been ordered to seek counseling or 
treatment as a result of her alcohol use, but answered “Yes” to having voluntarily sought 
counseling as a result of her use of alcohol. Applicant disclosed that she had successfully 
attended counseling in December 2004. (Item 3.) 
 
 On September 23, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). When asked whether she had ever been 
charged with an alcohol offense, she responded “No.” She was then confronted with her 
arrest in April 2004 for DWI, a Class B misdemeanor. (Item 4.) Public safety records had 
revealed the arrest but also that she pleaded guilty to count II, a lesser charge of 
obstructing a highway passageway, a Class B misdemeanor. She was given deferred 
adjudication for one year and placed on one year of probation, fined $500, and ordered to 
pay court costs of $251.(Items 5-6.) As for her failure to disclose the 2004 DWI charge, 
Applicant explained that she did not consider the incident to be a DWI because she was 
not convicted of the charge. Regarding her listed alcohol counseling, Applicant explained 
that she had voluntarily attended and completed a three-day alcohol awareness program in 
December 2004. She was working a second job as a bartender at that time and the stress 
of working two jobs and being around alcohol so often had made it easy to drink too much. 
She became concerned that her drinking was becoming excessive. She stopped working 
as a bartender. Applicant asserted that her current alcohol consumption of three to four 
beers at home three or four times a week was under control and that she was not drinking 
to intoxication. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested for DWI on or about April 10, 2015, and detained overnight 
after completing a blood-alcohol test at a local hospital. Applicant reported her arrest to 
security officials at work, who, in turn, notified the DOD CAF about the incident on April 15, 
2015. On July 23, 2015, Applicant pleaded guilty to a charge of misdemeanor DWI. She 
5 
 
was sentenced to pay a $400 fine and $50 court costs, to serve 12 months of community 
supervision at a cost of $50 a month, to submit to a substance abuse evaluation within 60 
days, and to attend a victim impact panel within 180 days. (Item 11.) She was assessed a 
driver’s license fee of $2,000 a year for the next three years. (Item 10.) 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant stated the following about her April 2015 DWI: 
 
I knew I made a mistake and went to court and pleaded guilty. I did 
everything the court asked me to do. I paid all fines, attended all classes and 
every probation appointment. I reported to [employer name] security as soon 
as it happened. (Item 2.) 
 
Applicant provided no information about the circumstances that led to her April 2015 arrest. 
In response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that she has sought counseling through an 
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) “for effective ways to deal with stress and anxiety.” 
Applicant did not indicate when she sought those services. There is no documentation 
showing the result of the substance abuse evaluation that the court ordered or any details 
about her drinking pattern after September 2013. 
 
Financial 
 
 On October 12, 2005, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. She listed 
unsecured nonpriority claims totaling $23,578, consisting of $20,881 in credit card debt, a 
$200 medical bill from 2004, and a $2,497 personal loan obtained in 2004 to address some 
bills. She listed monthly income and expenses of $1,657 and $1,555, respectively. (Item 9.) 
On October 20, 2005, Applicant reported to her employer that she had filed for bankruptcy. 
(Item 11.) She was granted a Chapter 7 discharge in February 2006. (Items 4, 7.) Applicant 
explained in response to the SOR that a roommate moved out and let her with all the bills 
when she had bills of her own accumulated from a past relationship.2 She could not pay 
some of her debts. Apparently, after she was turned down by a consumer credit counseling 
service, she applied for bankruptcy on the advice of her attorney so that she could rebuild 
her credit. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant was extended consumer credit after her bankruptcy discharge. She 
opened more than 20 consumer-credit accounts, including a joint mortgage loan obtained 
in April 2009 for $220,702. (Items 7-8.) 
 
 Applicant disclosed no financial issues of potential security concern on her August 
2013 SF 86. She responded negatively to all the financial record inquiries concerning any 
delinquency involving routine accounts. (Item 3.) A check of Applicant’s credit record on 
September 17, 2013, revealed her 2006 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, but no recent 
delinquencies. In August 2013, she obtained from a credit union (credit union X) a car loan 
of $15,020, to be repaid at $342 per month, and an installment loan of $6,964, to be repaid 
                                                 
2 According to the address information on her SF 86, Applicant lived with a former boyfriend from May 1999 to 
January 2003. She rented or lived with a friend until December 2004 when she began cohabiting with her 
second husband in a home they owned. (Item 2.) 
6 
 
at $148 per month. She was making timely payment of $152 per month a credit card 
balance of $7,542 (SOR ¶ 2.d). She otherwise owed only $20 on a credit card account 
opened in August 2009. Applicant had two open credit card accounts with zero balances, 
including the account alleged in SOR ¶ 2.e. (Item 7.) 
 
 During her September 2013 interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant 
described her financial situation as good in that she was meeting all of her financial 
obligations on time. She volunteered that she had been recently approved for a home loan 
but chose instead to save for a better down payment on a home and to pay for private 
school for her daughter. (Item 4.) 
 
 In May 2014, Applicant obtained a mortgage loan for $137,237. In July 2013, she 
obtained a loan with a credit union to be repaid at $567 per month (SOR ¶ 2.c). As of May 
2016, the loan was charged off for $11,252. She made no payments on the credit card 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d after July 2015, As of February 2016, she owed a charged-
off balance of $9,970. Additionally, she made no payments on the account alleged in SOR 
¶ 2.e after August 2015. As of July 2016, she owed a charged-off balance of $960. A credit 
card account that she opened in February 2015 was charged off for $723 and sold (not 
alleged). As for the two loans obtained from credit union X in August 2012, the car loan 
had a balance of $4,671. The unsecured loan had been refinanced in September 2014 for 
$6,955. As of August 2016, she had made payments to reduce the balance of that loan to 
$4,775. (Item 8.) Applicant borrowed against her retirement in an effort to address her 
financial obligations. (AE A.) She is repaying the loan at $50 a month by payroll deduction. 
(Item 10.) 
 
 On August 4, 2015, Applicant informed her employer that she intended to file for 
bankruptcy due to legal expenses. (Item 11.) She had bills from her DWI, including court 
costs and probation fees. Additionally, her mortgage payment increased from $845 per 
month to $1,449 due to an error in calculating the amount required in escrow to pay the 
property taxes. (AE A.) To relieve her financial strain, on July 7, 2016, Applicant filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition listing nonpriority unsecured claims totaling $42,188: a 
$1,143 payday loan from 2015; a $946 credit card debt from December 2014; a $900 
personal loan from 2013; a $466 credit card debt from March 2015; a $9,970 credit card 
debt from November 2008 (SOR ¶ 2.d), an $867 medical debt from April 2016; an $11,447 
loan from July 2014 (SOR ¶ 2.c);  $5,085 on the signature loan refinanced in September 
2014 (later reaffirmed); a $724 credit card debt that was charged off and sold; a $3,743 
PayPal credit card debt from 2011; a $631 loan from June 2015, a $493 medical debt from 
2014; a $1,828 personal loan from April 2013; the $960 charged-off credit card debt (SOR 
¶ 2.e); and a $2,981 signature loan from August 2014.3 Applicant reported monthly gross 
income of $3,482 per month ($3,790 with overtime). With child support income of $847 per 
month, her net discretionary income with overtime was reportedly $3,648 while her monthly 
expenses totaled $3,633 leaving her with only $15 a month with overtime income. Her 
monthly expenses included her mortgage payment of $1,449, school tuition for her 
daughter at $212, $342 for her car loan, and $166 for her driver’s license fee. (Item 10.) 
                                                 
3 The dates Applicant provided for when the debts were incurred correspond in some cases to when the 
accounts were opened, e.g., the $9,970 credit card debt in SOR ¶ 2.ein s 
7 
 
 
 Applicant reaffirmed her mortgage loan and her car and signature loans with credit 
union X. (Items 2, 11; AE A.) On October 19, 2016, Applicant was granted a Chapter 7 
discharge of the unsecured nonpriority debts that she had not reaffirmed. (Item 2.) In 
response to the FORM, Applicant indicated on January 30, 2017, that she had successfully 
completed the payments to cover the escrow error and that her monthly mortgage 
obligation would be considerably lower in the next 90 days. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
8 
 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is articulated in AG ¶ 21, which states: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The evidence of abusive drinking is limited in this case, although Applicant’s April 
2015 DWI establishes disqualifying condition AG ¶ 22(a) and perhaps AG ¶ 22(c), which 
provide: 
  
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouses abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder. 
 
Concerning Applicant’s arrest for DWI in April 2004, the record evidence is insufficient to 
prove that she was intoxicated at the time. She pleaded guilty to a lesser charge of 
obstructing a highway passageway, and there is information in the record about how many 
drinks she had consumed. Applicant felt her drinking was becoming sufficiently excessive 
by December 2004 for her to seek assistance through her EAP program at work and to 
attend a three-day alcohol awareness program in December 2004, but there is no evidence 
that she was engaging in habitual or binge consumption. 
 
 Applicant was drinking three to four beers a night three or four times a week as of 
September 2013. While she denies becoming intoxicated from drinking in that quantity and 
regularity, she does not dispute that she was intoxicated on the occasion of her April 2015 
DWI. Her DWI conviction could be characterized as “so infrequent” under AG ¶ 23(a), 
which provides: 
 
so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. 
 
9 
 
However, her 2015 DWI is relatively recent. With scant information about her current 
consumption in the record, it is difficult to conclude that she is unlikely to abuse alcohol in 
the future. 
 
 Applicant’s attendance at a three-day alcohol awareness program in December 
2004 is an action taken to overcome her maladaptive alcohol use that could trigger AG ¶ 
23(b), which states: 
 
the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol use, 
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations. 
 
Whatever she learned in the alcohol awareness class, it did not preclude her from driving 
while intoxicated in April 2015. In January 2017, Applicant indicated that she sought 
counseling for effective ways to deal with stress and anxiety, but she provided no detail 
about the counseling, to include its focus or its duration, or about any changes in her 
drinking habits that would make recurrence of excessive alcohol consumption less likely. In 
November 2016, Applicant asserted that she completed all the requirements of the court 
for her DWI, including attending all classes. In its adverse information report concerning 
the disposition of Applicant’s 2015 DWI, her employer indicated that Applicant was to 
submit to an alcohol abuse evaluation within 60 days. An evaluation from a qualified 
medical professional showing a good prognosis would have gone a long way toward 
mitigating the alcohol consumption security concerns raised by her 2015 DWI. It is not 
clear that Applicant has an established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence 
satisfying AG ¶ 23(b) or AG ¶ 23(d). AG ¶ 23(d) requires that “the individual has 
successfully completed a treatment program along with any required aftercare, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations.” Too many questions about Applicant’s 
drinking remain unanswered. She failed to present enough information in reform to mitigate 
the concerns raised by her 2015 DWI. 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
10 
 
known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result 
from criminal activity, including espionage. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts, which led to two Chapter 7 bankruptcies, establish the 
Government’s prima facie case for disqualification. After she was granted a discharge of 
$23,578 in unsecured nonpriority claims in February 2006, she opened several consumer 
credit accounts that for the most part were paid on time until 2015, when she stopped 
paying on several accounts, including those alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.c-2.e.Disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 Applicant has the burden of presenting evidence of explanation, extenuation, or 
mitigation to overcome the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Under the AG 
effective for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017, a record of undisputed consumer 
delinquency may be mitigated under one or more of the following conditions under ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from a 
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, 
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) cannot reasonably apply. Two bankruptcy filings in 
little more than a decade raises considerable concern about Applicant’s financial judgment. 
Although she paid her debts on time for several years after her first bankruptcy, she relied 
heavily on consumer credit over the years. Her September 2013 credit report (Item 7) 
shows that she opened over 20 consumer-credit accounts after her 2006 bankruptcy 
discharge. Despite borrowing from her retirement account to cover her expenses, she 
could not afford to pay all her bills and had to resort to her very recent bankruptcy to 
alleviate her financial stress. One of the debts discharged in her 2016 bankruptcy is a 
payday loan of $1,143, which suggests that she was living from paycheck to paycheck. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) has some applicability if, as Applicant asserts, her 
first bankruptcy was caused by a former roommate vacating their apartment and leaving 
11 
 
her with all the bills, and her second bankruptcy was caused or contributed to by a mistake 
in escrow calculations for her current mortgage loan. Applicant presented no corroborating 
documentation. Her credit report from August 2016 (Item 8) shows that she acquired a 
mortgage of $137,237 in May 2014 that was transferred in July 2015. Neither the high 
credit nor the monthly payment for that loan is reflected on the credit report. Even 
assuming an appreciable increase in her monthly mortgage obligation from $845 to $1,449, 
her recent financial difficulties cannot be fully attributed to the unexpected mortgage debt. 
As shown on her list of monthly expenses as of her 2016 bankruptcy petition, Applicant is 
paying a driver’s license fee of $2,000 for her DWI at $166 per month for three years. Legal 
fees and fines and costs incurred for her 2015 DWI clearly contributed to her financial 
stress. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply to legal and court costs caused by her own 
irresponsibility. Moreover, among her expenses is a monthly tuition fee of $212 for her 
daughter which is difficult to justify when her creditors are left with no recourse in the 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies in that her financial stress has been alleviated by the Chapter 7 
bankruptcy discharge of her debts in October 2016. Absent fraud, her unsecured 
nonpriority debts have been discharged. She is no longer legally liable to repay the 
delinquencies in SOR ¶¶ 2.c-2.e. As required for a bankruptcy discharge, Applicant was 
required to complete approved financial counseling. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 20(d), the concept of good faith requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness or adherence to duty or obligation. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004).  Reliance on a legally available option 
such as a Chapter 7 bankruptcy does not carry the same mitigating weight as repayment 
arrangements or negotiated settlements. Creditors covered by a bankruptcy discharge are 
left without a legal remedy. A Chapter 7 bankruptcy is not a substitute for a demonstrated 
track record of debt repayment. AG ¶ 20(d) is not satisfied.  
 
 The salient issue going forward is whether Applicant can be counted on to live within 
her means without incurring new delinquencies. There is mixed evidence in that regard. 
She paid off some consumer credit accounts on terms acceptable to her creditors in the 
years between her bankruptcies. Her extensive reliance on consumer credit raises some 
concern about her financial management, however. Her present monthly income and 
expenses indicate a tight budget. She reported only $15 in monthly net income after paying 
her expenses, which included $1,449 on her mortgage loan and $342 on her car loan, 
which she reaffirmed in her bankruptcy, but nothing for personal care expenses or 
recreation. More significantly, her positive cash flow appears to be dependent on $300 in 
monthly overtime earnings. It is unclear whether she has any savings or checking deposits 
that she could rely on in the case of an unexpected expense. 
 
  Applicant indicated in late January 2017 that her mortgage payment would be 
considerably lower in the next ninety days. I can only base my decision on the evidence 
before me, which suggests overuse of consumer credit, a reliance on loans and borrowing 
from her retirement assets to pay debts, and leaving creditors without legal recourse. 
12 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy discharge does not fully mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4 The analyses under Guidelines G and F are incorporated in 
my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The security clearance adjudication is not designed to punish an applicant for past 
actions. Nor is it aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it involves an 
evaluation of an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in light of the security 
guidelines in the Directive. See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
 Having chosen to rely on the written record, it was incumbent on Applicant to 
provide sufficient information to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding her circumstances. Not enough is known about Applicant’s current alcohol 
consumption for me to conclude that a recurrence of excessive consumption is unlikely. 
Applicant asserts, with no evidence to the contrary, that “[she has] not failed any review or 
been accused of committing any act by [her] employer during this 11 year period that cast 
doubt on [her] reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” However, the Appeal Board 
has repeatedly held that the government need not wait until an applicant mishandles or 
fails to safeguard classified information before denying or revoking security clearance 
eligibility. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009, citing Adams v. 
Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969)). It is well settled that once a concern arises 
regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against 
the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990). For the reasons discussed, Applicant has raised enough doubt in that 
regard to where I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue her security clearance eligibility. 
                                                 
4 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
13 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e.   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
