 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-02833 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about her debts. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On September 22, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On November 7, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns under the adjudicative guideline2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and 
requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on March 21, 2017, and I convened the requested hearing on 
June 14, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
three items identified as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3. Applicant testified and 
produced six documents identified as Applicant Exhibits (Ax.) A - F. I admitted each 
party’s exhibits without objection.3 I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 26, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $70,772 for 11 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.k). In response, Applicant denied, with 
explanations and supporting documents (Tr. 17 – 19), the debts alleged at SOR 1.f and 
1.j. She admitted the remaining allegations, also with explanations. When Applicant 
submitted her e-QIP, she did not disclose any specific debts, but stated that she was 
“working to bring [her] debts down.” She also disclosed she was using a credit repair 
firm to resolve her debts. Credit reports obtained during the ensuing background 
investigation document all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. In addition to the 
facts established by Applicant’s admissions and Gx. 1 - 3, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 67 years old. Since September 2012, she has worked for a defense 
contractor in a position for which she needs a security clearance. She previously 
worked for the federal government doing similar work at the same job site. In 2012, 
Applicant retired from federal service after 35 years. Her retirement was voluntary, but 
by her own admission, not well planned. (Gx. 1; Tr. 12, 69 – 71) 
 
 Applicant has two adult daughters, the older of whom is now 50 years old and a 
career federal employee with severe financial problems. Starting in about 2007, 
Applicant began financially supporting that daughter because her daughter (Applicant’s 
granddaughter) had become pregnant. From 2007 until she retired in September 2012, 
Applicant gave her daughter and granddaughter about $500 a month in cash, and 
provided the granddaughter about $7,000 to buy a used car. However, most of 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 A copy of Department Counsel’s “discovery letter” and a list of the Government’s exhibits also are 
included as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I and II, respectively. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s financial support occurred through use of credit cards and other forms of her 
personal credit. (Tr. 38, 42 – 43, 63 – 65, 71 – 72) 
 
 Applicant was able to provide cash and keep up with payments on her credit 
accounts while she was still a full-time federal employee. Before she retired, Applicant 
brought home about $3,500 each month. After she retired in 2012, her income dropped 
by about $2,000 and she stopped fully supporting her daughter. Unfortunately, she also 
struggled to pay her credit cards and other financial obligations. Those accounts 
became delinquent starting in early 2013. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 43 – 44) 
 
 In late 2012, Applicant enlisted the services of a credit repair firm to start 
resolving her debts. Over the next four years, she paid that firm $571 each month to 
negotiate settlements with her various creditors. Some of the monthly fee was to be set 
aside to accumulate amounts that could be used to negotiate settlements. Applicant 
stopped paying that firm in 2016 after the service failed to address any of her debts. 
(Gx. 1; Tr. 44 – 47, 65)  
 
 For the past year, Applicant has relied on a nationally-known financial expert 
whose guidance she accesses through radio and internet programs. Based on his 
advice, Applicant has embarked on her own five-year plan for resolving her debts. 
Starting in May 2017, Applicant started making payments to the creditors listed at SOR 
1.a, 1.c, 1.e , 1.g, and 1.h. In May and June 2017, Applicant contacted the creditors at 
SOR 1.b, 1.d, and 1.k to negotiate similar repayment agreements. (Answer; Ax. C – F; 
Tr. 47 - 54) 
 
 The civil judgment alleged at SOR 1.f has been in repayment since November 
2014. Applicant did not present documentation that addressed a different debt to the 
same creditor that is alleged at SOR 1.j. (Answer; Ax. B; Ax. F) 
 
 Applicant is current on all of her current obligations (e.g., mortgage, car loan, 
insurance, taxes, etc.). She has not incurred any new delinquencies and has a positive 
net monthly cash flow, after expenses including over $700 in debt payments, of 
between $500 and $1,000. (Ax. F; Tr. 40 – 42, 57 – 60, 67 – 69) 
 
 Applicant’s associates, family and close friends hold her in high regard. Letters of 
reference and recommendation extol Applicant’s generosity, character, and 
professionalism. (Ax. A) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
                                                 
4 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information.  
 
 A security clearance decision resolves only whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have access to 
classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible 
information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Available information documented the SOR allegations that 
Applicant owes or owed a significant level of past-due or delinquent debt. Most of that 
debt remains unresolved. 
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are recent and 
continuing. As to AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant did not establish that her debts arose from 
circumstances beyond her control. She decided to live beyond her means by abusing 
her personal credit to help her daughter. Even when she was still a full-time federal 
employee, Applicant did not have the means to support her daughter and 
granddaughter to the extent she did. When Applicant retired without proper planning, 
she lost her already slim margin for error and could not keep up with the debts reflected 
in the SOR. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not available because the assistance she sought turned out to be 
wholly ineffective. Although she may not have known that to be the case at the time she 
hired the credit repair firm, at some point during the next few years she should have 
realized she needed to change course. 
 
Finally, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. In May 2017, Applicant embarked on a plan 
that should eventually resolve her debts. Nonetheless, except for the debt at SOR 1.f, 
she has not yet established a record of steady payments that shows she will adhere to 
that plan until completion. Her debts have been delinquent for several years, but the 
only reliable actions she has taken began about a month before the hearing. This does 
not constitute a prompt, good-faith effort.  
 
Applicant has not established a reliable record of fiscal responsibility that inspires 
confidence that her financial problems are under control and will not recur. On balance, 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s 
information. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). I am mindful of the positive information provided by her references. 
Nonetheless, Applicant’s actions to resolve her debts, sound as they may be, are too 
recent to alleviate the doubts raised by the adverse information about her finances. 
Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, 
those doubts must be resolved against granting eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
