 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01882 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 21, 2015. On 
August 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 12, 2016, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on October 26, 2016. On November 8, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 through 6, was sent to Applicant, who was given 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on November 25, 2016, and submitted 
additional evidence, which was admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 4, a summary of an enhanced subject interview (ESI) 
conducted on March 26, 2015. The ESI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that she was entitled to comment on 
the accuracy of the ESI summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; 
or object to consideration of the ESI on the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant 
submitted a detailed response to the FORM but did not comment on the accuracy or 
completeness of the ESI summary, nor did she object to it. I conclude that she waived 
any objections to the ESI summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act 
like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights 
under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c. She denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b on the ground that it was the same debt as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old contract investigator employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2015, and she requires a security clearance for this employment. She served 
on active duty in the U.S. Army from April 1981 to June 1990 and received an honorable 
discharge. She held a top secret clearance while on active duty. (Item 4 at 10.) She 
received an associate’s degree in December 1989.  
 
Until recently, Applicant was also self-employed as a corporate officer and owner 
of a family business that she and her husband established in December 1990. The debts 
alleged in the SOR are related to the now-defunct family business. 
 
 During the economic downturn in 2008 and 2009, Applicant was unable to arrange 
financing to continue the operations of the family business. She obtained a mortgage loan 
for about $225,000 in 2009, using the family’s personal residence as collateral, to pay off 
several high-interest commercial loans. The monthly $2,000 payments on the mortgage 
loan are current. She also used credit cards in an effort to keep the company running. 
When she submitted her SCA in May 2015, she disclosed seven delinquent credit-card 
accounts totaling about $126,061. She settled three accounts in April 2010, one in July 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application (Item 3) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
2011, one in April 2012, one in July 2012, and one in April 2014. (Item 3 at 41-46.) All the 
accounts were related to the failed family business, and they are now closed. (Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant’s credit report from June 2015 reflected a judgment for $18,608 entered 
against her in February 2011 and a collection account for $15,300 for the same creditor. 
The judgment is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and the collection account is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
Documents submitted by Applicant in her response to the FORM reflect that the judgment 
and the collection account involved the same credit-card account. (AX A, Attachments 1 
and 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s attorney was involved in negotiating a settlement of the judgment when 
he became ill, and the creditor’s attorney would not negotiate without Applicant’s attorney 
present. In 2013, Applicant’s attorney passed away. In April 2015, the creditor’s attorney 
contacted Applicant about a settlement, and negotiations followed. (Item 3 at 39.) In her 
response to the FORM, Applicant stated that she received an oral offer to settle the debt 
in December 2016, but she was unable to accept the offer because she did not have 
sufficient cash available. She stated that she expected to be able to settle the debt within 
three months from the date of her response. (AX A.) 
 
 During the ESI in March 2016, Applicant disclosed that the federal and state 
income tax returns for 2014 and 2015 had not been filed for the family business because 
of their accountant’s heavy workload, delays in providing necessary documentation to the 
accountant, and complications in completing the returns due to sale of all the company’s 
assets in 2014. Applicant knew that the company owed no federal income taxes because 
the business losses from previous years were being carried forward, but that she believed 
that she owed “a few thousand dollars” in state sales taxes. (Item 4 at 12.) In her response 
to the FORM, she submitted documentary evidence that the federal returns for both years 
were filed electronically and accepted on December 23, 2016. The documents reflect that 
the company owed no federal income taxes. (AX A, Attachment 4.) As of the date of her 
response to the FORM, she had not yet filed the state tax returns.  
 
 The president and chief executive officer of a local credit union with whom 
Applicant has done business submitted a letter attesting to Applicant’s reliability. The 
letter states that, between 1999 and 2016, Applicant obtained 19 loans from the credit 
union, some secured by company assets and some based on her signature alone, and 
all were paid as agreed. The letters states that, notwithstanding the delinquent credit-card 
account alleged in the SOR, the credit union continues to give Applicant credit without 
concerns about whether she will pay the amounts due. (Attachment to SOR answer.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
 4
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
The evidence reflects that the judgement alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and the collection 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b involve the same credit-card account. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I have resolved SOR ¶ 
1.b in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c and are sufficient to raise the following disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”); and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file or fraudulently 
filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax as required”). The following mitigating conditions are potentially 
applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 6
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and were 
not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. The debts alleged in the SOR are business debts and 
not the product of excessive personal spending. The debts were caused by an economic 
downturn in 2008 and 2009, which was a condition beyond Applicant’s control. She has 
acted responsibly by remaining in contact with creditors and resolving all the business 
debts except for the one debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and the debt for state sales taxes. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need 
only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Applicant has systematically paid or settled almost all the debts related to the failed 
business. She has remained in contact with the creditor for the one remaining debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a and is actively working to resolve it. She is working with her accountant to 
resolve the state tax issues.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is established for the past-due federal income tax returns, but not for 
the state taxes. However, based on her track record, I am confident that she will resolve 
the state tax issues as soon as possible.3  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
                                                          
3 Administrative judges do not have authority to grant conditional clearances. ISCR Case No. 01-24328, 
2003 WL 21979745 at *2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2003). However, applicants do not have a vested right to a 
security clearance. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security significance of past conduct 
or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-
06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Thus, violation of a promise made in a security context to pay 
legitimate debts may result in reconsideration of the decision to grant a security clearance.  
 
 
 7
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I have considered Applicant’s military 
service, during which she held a security clearance for many years, apparently without 
incident. I have considered her systematic approach to resolving all the debts from the 
failed family business. Because Applicant requested a determination on the record 
without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate her credibility and sincerity based on 
demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by her delinquent business debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
