 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------ )  ADP Case No. 16-01067 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for a public trust position. She did not present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from her history of 
financial problems. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on June 10, 2015. Thereafter, on October 1, 2016, after 
reviewing the application and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort 
Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), detailing a 
trustworthiness concern under Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR is 
similar to a complaint.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2016, and she requested a 
decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Her answer consisted of 
handwritten responses on a copy of the SOR and a one-page memorandum without 
attachments or enclosures.    
 
2 
 
On January 12, 2017, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on January 23, 2017. She did not reply 
to the FORM within the 30-day period provided for under the Directive. The case was 
assigned to me October 1, 2017.    
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibits 10 and 11, which are reports of 
investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interviews that took place during 
background investigations in February 2012 and November 2015. The ROI are not 
authenticated by a witness, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.1 The Directive 
provides no exception to the authentication requirement. Indeed, the authentication 
requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
ROI were not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the 
authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the record does not demonstrate that 
Applicant, who has not replied to the FORM, understood the concepts of authentication, 
waiver, and admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that she understood the 
implications of waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, given 
the lack of an authenticating witness, I have not considered the ROI in reaching my 
decision.   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old customer service representative for a health-care 
contractor to the Defense Department. She is seeking to obtain or retain eligibility to 
occupy a position of public trust for her job responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary 
because her job involves access to sensitive but unclassified information. 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the SOR alleged a history of 
financial problems consisting of seven collection or charged-off accounts in amounts 
ranging from $381 to $10,194 for a total of about $14,249. In her answer to the SOR, 
she admits four debts, states that two debts are in question, and states that one debt 
was cleared. The delinquent accounts are established by her admissions along with the 
credit reports in the written record.2 This is no documentation in the written record to 
show that any of the seven delinquent accounts were paid, settled, in a payment 
arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved.   
                                                          
1 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
2 Exhibits 6, 7, 8, and 9.  
 
 
3 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant acknowledged being asked about the same 
delinquent account (presumably, the largest debt for $10,194) several times during the 
processing of her case. But she expressed surprise at the other six delinquent 
accounts, and she also complained about the fairness of considering those matters by 
obtaining additional credit reports. She claimed to have paid a couple of the debts, but 
offered no specifics. She did not present a plan for how she intended to address and 
resolve the delinquent accounts. Nor did she submit any documentation in support of 
her case.  
  
Law and Policy 
 
This case is adjudicated under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 
2017. 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,3 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.4 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
  AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
                                                          
3 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
4 AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a concern under Guideline F. All seven of the delinquent 
accounts are unresolved and ongoing. There is certainly not sufficient evidence to 
conclude that she is making a good-faith effort to repay her delinquent debts. Moreover, 
given that she requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing, the 
lack of documentation undermines her case. It’s the responsibility of the individual 
applicant to produce relevant documentation in support of their case. Here, Applicant 
has not met her burden of production, because she did not present any documentation 
showing that she is making some sort of effort to resolve the delinquent accounts. 
Accordingly, based on the written record, I am unable to make the affirmative 
determination that Applicant is an acceptable risk.5 
 
 To conclude, Applicant’s history of financial problems, which is ongoing, creates 
doubt or concern about her reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a 
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or 
vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not present sufficient information to explain and 
mitigate the trustworthiness concern.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(a).  
