 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     ----------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-02832 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from an automobile loan, 
for which he cosigned, that ended with a repossession of the vehicle and a charged-off 
account balance of nearly $11,000. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on September 28, 2015.1 This document is commonly known 
as a security clearance application. Thereafter, on October 31, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
2 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 6, 2016. He requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. His response consisted of a two-page 
memorandum without enclosures or attachments.        
 
On December 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it February 7, 2017. He replied to the 
FORM with a four-page memorandum with three enclosures, which are made part of the 
record as Exhibit A. The case was assigned to me October 1, 2017.     
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Upon review of Applicant’s answer to the SOR, I was concerned that he may in 
fact want an in-person hearing to present his case, to include witnesses. Given that 
concern, on October 10, 2017, I contacted Applicant via his work e-mail address and 
gave him an opportunity to change his mind and request a hearing.2 He replied on 
October 16, 2017;3 he did not request an in-person hearing; and he submitted additional 
written matters, including a character reference from a co-worker and a character 
reference from an officer in a state veterans’ organization, which are made part of the 
record, collectively, as Exhibit B.    
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the April 2016 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated by a witness, as required under 
¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.4 Likewise, Section 5(a) of Executive Order 10865 prohibits 
receipt and consideration of “investigative reports” without authenticating witnesses. The 
Directive provides no exception to the authentication requirement. Indeed, the 
authentication requirement is the exception to the general rule that prohibits 
consideration of an ROI.  
 
Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the 
ROI was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a “waiver” of the 
authentication requirement. Although Applicant did not address the ROI in his reply to 
                                                          
2 Appellate Exhibit I.  
 
3 Appellate Exhibit II.  
 
4 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.).  
 
 
3 
 
the FORM, his two-page memorandum is a detailed document. It contains an 
“Argument” section wherein Applicant challenges the basis for the action as “economic 
and financial profiling” and persecution for crimes he did not commit. Given his detailed 
reply to the FORM, as well as the tone and tenor of the reply, I am persuaded that 
Applicant thoroughly reviewed the contents of the FORM, and he elected not to raise an 
objection to the ROI. Accordingly, the ROI is admitted and I have considered it in 
reaching my decision.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job 
as a senior quality-assurance engineer for a federal contractor. He has worked for the 
same federal contractor in the defense industry since 2002. His educational background 
includes a bachelor’s degree awarded in 2004. He has never married. He has two 
children, both young adults, who reside with him.      
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of ten 
delinquent accounts ranging in amounts from $25 to $10,980 for a total of about 
$12,582. Nine of the ten debts are medical collection accounts for a total of about 
$1,602. The remaining debt is a $10,980 charged-off account, which is discussed 
further below. The delinquent accounts are established by credit reports from October 
2015 and August 2016.5  
 
During the April 2016 background investigation, Applicant explained the following 
about the $10,980 charged-off account: 
 
[Applicant] stated he had cosigned (date unknown) for his niece, [name 
omitted] to purchase a 2004 or 2006 (year not recalled) Malibu car in [city, 
state]. [His niece] had allowed the car to be repossessed 3 or 4 months 
after purchase. [He] does not know if [his niece] made any payments or 
was past due on any payments during this time. After the repossession 
(date unknown), [he] was contacted about the $10,980 balance and 
informed it needed repayment. [He] did not respond to the letter because 
he did not believe it was his responsibility to repay the debt, despite 
cosigning the car note. [He] received a letter in 2015 (exact date not 
recalled) and was informed that the statute of limitations on the balance 
was due and he was no longer required to pay the balance. Therefore, 
[he] declined to sign a release for this account due to the contents of the 
last letter regarding a time limitation from the lender. [He] does not want to 
begin receiving any other demands for repayment as he has no intent to 
repay this balance. [He] could not provide any other details regarding this 
account as he does not know them. The car belonged to [his niece] and 
[he] did not know the details of her payment schedule to the lender.6 
                                                          
5 Exhibits 4 and 5.  
 
6 Exhibit 3.  
 
 
4 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he had tried to work with the 
creditor early in the process, but he was unsuccessful in making a payment 
arrangement. He also indicated that since the account was charged off, he had 
dismissed it as well.7  
 
Applicant’s reply to the FORM included a January 2017 credit report, which 
reflects the charged-off account.8 His credit report shows a joint account was opened in 
May 2008 and closed in January 2011; the account had a high balance of $24,593; the 
terms of repayment called for a $410 monthly payment for 60 months; the account went 
into collection and was then charged off as a bad debt in the amount of $10,980. His 
credit report also shows a payment history rated at 94.8%, which reflects the 
percentage of payments he had made on time. There is no documentation in the written 
record to establish that the debt was paid, settled or compromised, in a payment 
arrangement, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise resolved.  
 
 A co-worker believes that Applicant is an honest, dependable, and hard-working 
employee who is an asset to their team, and has no concerns about Applicant’s security 
suitability.9 The officer in the state veterans’ organization believes Applicant is 
trustworthy, loyal, and honest, and has no reservations vouching for his character.10 
Outside of work, Applicant is extensively involved in youth sports leagues in which he is 
trusted to handle money and has done so without incident.11   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.12  
 
                                                          
7 A charged-off account is simply a declaration by a creditor that the amount of the debt is unlikely to be 
collected. This occurs when a debtor becomes severely delinquent on the debt, normally more than 180 
days past due. A charge-off is an accounting practice, taking the debt off the creditor’s balance sheet; 
however, the accounting move by the creditor in no way affects the debtor’s obligation to pay what is 
owed. In simple terms, a debt is owed until it is paid, bearing in mind that state laws provide a statute of 
limitations for collecting a debt. But it should be noted that security clearance decisions are not controlled 
or limited by statutes of limitation. Finally, a charged-off account will stay on a debtor’s credit report for 
seven years and then must be removed under the Fair Credit Reporting Act.  
 
8 Exhibit A.  
 
9 Exhibit B.  
 
10 Exhibit B.  
 
11 Exhibit B.  
 
12 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
 
5 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.13 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”14 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.15 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.16 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.17 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.18 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.19 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.20 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.21 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.22 
  
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
                                                          
13 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
14 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
17 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
18 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
21 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
22 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
 
6 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.23 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 AG ¶ 19(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. With that said, I have 
given little weight to the nine medical collection accounts for less than $2,000 that 
remain unresolved. It is presumed that those debts were incurred for necessary medical 
care or treatment as opposed to frivolous or irresponsible spending or otherwise living 
beyond one’s means. Medical debt is unlike other types of debt. It is usually unplanned, 
unexpected, and nondiscretionary. And it can add hundreds if not thousands of dollars 
in debt in a short period, which can be overwhelming for a debtor. It is my view that 
having less than $2,000 in unresolved medical collection accounts does not fatally 
undermine Applicant’s security suitability. Accordingly, those allegations are decided for 
Applicant. 
 
 The same cannot be said for the $10,980 charged-off account. Applicant did not 
produce any documented proof that this debt is being resolved in a responsible way. As 
noted in the findings of fact, he has no intention of doing anything to resolve this debt, 
as he does not think the debt is his responsibility. But as a cosigner of the loan, he 
assumed the same legal obligation as his niece, and he was likewise obliged to repay 
the deficiency balance due after the car was repossessed and sold. Although his niece 
                                                          
23 AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 
 
had possession and use of the car, and she was the principal obligor on the loan, 
Applicant’s refusal or unwillingness to satisfy his legal obligation on the loan shows that 
he did not act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant’s inability or unwillingness or both to satisfy a debt stemming from a car 
loan for which he cosigned creates doubt about his reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. His favorable evidence includes his two 
character references and his constructive community involvement in youth sports 
leagues. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he 
did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h-1.j:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
