 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02414 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 24, 2015. On 
September 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1  
  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 6, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on October 19, 2016. On October 20, 2016, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 through 7, was sent to Applicant, who 
was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on October 31, 2016, and 
did not respond. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 5, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on December 22, 2015. The PSI was not authenticated as required by 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to 
comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, 
deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. I conclude that he waived any objections to the PSI summary by failing to 
respond to the FORM. “Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, 
they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the 
Directive.” ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.g, 
1.i-1.k, 1.m, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.s. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.h, 1.l, 
1.o, and 1.r. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
since August 2015. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 1978 to 1981 and in 
the U.S. Army Reserve until 1993, when he was honorably discharged. He held a 
security clearance while on active duty in the U.S. Army and he received a clearance 
from another federal agency in June 2015.  
 
 Applicant married in October 1980 and divorced in May 1988. He married his 
current spouse in February 2005. He has five adult children. 
 
Applicant previously worked for his current employer from February 2009 to 
March 2013. He worked in the private sector for about six months, was unemployed 
from September to December 2013, worked for another defense contractor from 
December 2013 to November 2014, and was unemployed from November 2014 to 
March 2015. He worked in the private sector from March 2015 until he began his current 
job.  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he was laid off by his current 
employer five times for short periods between 2013 and 2015. To avoid further layoffs, 
he transferred to a lower-paying job with no overtime. During the December PSI, he 
stated that he lives paycheck to paycheck. (Item 5 at 12.)  
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 4) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
 
 The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts totaling about $27,387. All the debts are 
reflected in the credit reports from October 2015 and June 2016. (Items 6 and 7.) 
Applicant admitted 13 debts and denied 6, but he did not explain or provide 
documentation showing the basis for the denials.  
 
In the December 2015 PSI, Applicant stated that his financial problems began in 
2010, when he could not afford the mortgage-loan payments on his home and could not 
find renters for it when he moved to another work location, where he was paying rent of 
$1,100 per month. (Item 5 at 4.) In his answer to the SOR, he stated that his wife is “in 
and out of hospitals,” but he provided no specific information about the amounts or 
dates of his medical expenses. 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he was paying $126 per month 
by payroll deduction for the child-support arrearage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q, but he 
submitted no documentation to support his statement. In the PSI, he stated that the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s was paid in full, but he admitted the debt in his answer to the SOR 
and provided no proof that it was resolved. In the PSI, he stated that he was making 
payments of $25-$30 per month on the credit-card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r. (Item 5 at 
9-10.) He presented no documentary evidence of contacts with his creditors, payments, 
or payment plans for any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
 4
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 5
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports included in the FORM establish 
three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. His periods of unemployment and his wife’s medical problems were 
conditions beyond his control, but he presented no evidence of the impact of his wife’s 
problems on his ability to pay other debts, and he has not acted responsibly toward his 
creditors. He submitted no documentary evidence of attempts to contact creditors, 
counseling, payments, payment plans, or a basis for disputing any of the debts. 
 
 
 6
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I have considered Applicant’s 
honorable military service and employment by defense contractors. Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent 
debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
