 
1 
                                         
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
        )  ISCR Case No. 16-03378 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision  
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence of resolution of his financial issues. 
Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On October 22, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1. On December 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. The SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On January 12, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. Transcript (Tr.) 14; HE 3. On February 21, 2017, Department Counsel was ready 
to proceed. On March 20, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On May 18, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for June 5, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.   
 
2 
                                         
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered 
one exhibit; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Transcript (Tr.) 16-18; GE 1-5; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. On June 13, 2017, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. Accordingly, 
I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h, and he 
denied the other SOR allegations. HE 3. He also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. HE 3. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional 
findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 65 years old, and a DOD contractor has employed him as a technical 
analyst since October 2015. Tr. 7, 20. From September 2009 to October 2015, another 
technology company employed him. Tr. 8. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 
1974 to 1981; he left active duty as a staff sergeant (E-5); and he received an honorable 
discharge. Tr. 7. He was a federal civilian employee for seven years, and he worked for 
18 years for a federal contractor. HE 3.  
 
In 1969, Applicant graduated from high school. Tr. 6. He has attended college; 
however, he has not received a degree. Tr. 7. Applicant was married from 1974 to 1994. 
Tr. 8. In 2002, he married his current spouse. Tr. 8. His children are ages 32, 37, and 42. 
Tr. 9.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is $66,000, and starting in June 2017, he received $2,048 
from the Social Security Administration (SSA). Tr. 21. His spouse receives $822 monthly 
in SSA payments. Tr. 22. Starting in February 2017, his spouse has been receiving $11 
an hour from her employment. Tr. 22. Applicant was unemployed from April through 
September 2009. Tr. 24. Applicant had financial problems beginning in 2009 when he 
was unemployed, and his spouse was unable to work outside their home because of her 
cancer. Tr. 25. More recently, Applicant had medical problems with his back. His spouse 
is responsible for handling the family finances. Tr. 29. She described their financial 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
   
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
situation in detail, and Applicant concurred with her description of the status of their debts. 
Tr. 53. The descriptions and actions of Applicant’s spouse are attributed to Applicant in 
this decision. 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges the following delinquent debts: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a charged-off debt for $10,030. Applicant moved to a different state; 
however, he was unable to register his vehicle because the creditor did not provide an 
original title to the Department of Motor Vehicles. HE 3. The vehicle was repossessed in 
January 2016. Tr. 30. Applicant contacted the creditor in an attempt to pay the arrearage 
and retrieve the vehicle. Tr. 26, 30. Applicant said the creditor violated state law by failing 
to assist in the retrieval process. Tr. 30. The creditor sold the vehicle at auction, and 
Applicant is in negotiation with the creditor to resolve this debt. Tr. 31. Applicant intends 
to pay this debt. Tr. 32.      
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a student-loan debt placed for collection for $8,967. Applicant’s 
forbearance ended, and the debt was transferred to a different collection company. Tr. 
32. Applicant was not sure which creditor or collection company was currently seeking 
payment. Tr. 33. Applicant’s February 4, 2017 credit report shows the debt has increased 
to $9,068. Tr. 51; GE 4. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a telecommunications debt placed for collection for $838. Applicant 
contacted the creditor, and the creditor was unable to locate the debt. Tr. 33. Applicant 
acknowledged that he might have cosigned for a telephone for one of his children. Tr. 48. 
Applicant disputed the presence of the debt on his credit report with the credit-reporting 
company. Tr. 34.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is a charged-off debt for $470. Applicant did not recognize the debt or 
the name of the creditor. Tr. 34.  Applicant disputed the presence of the debt on his credit 
report with the credit-reporting company. Tr. 35. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h are medical debts for $334 and $153. Applicant had about 
$450,000 in medical debt, and he is making payments to several medical creditors. Tr. 
36-37. He had boxes of medical debts. Tr. 45. Transfer of medical debts between the 
original creditor and collection companies made it difficult to determine the legitimacy of 
medical debts. Tr. 36-37. Insurance companies may be responsible for some of his 
medical debts. Tr. 45. Applicant was unsure whether some of the debts were paid or 
legitimate. Tr. 36. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a charged-off debt for $153. Applicant acknowledged responsibility 
for this debt, and he said he has made the first $30 payment to address it. Tr. 38. He did 
not provide a checking account statement or other evidence of the $30 payment. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g is a federal tax lien made against Applicant in December 2012 for 
$7,224. Applicant filed tax returns each year; however, for several years insufficient 
money was withheld from his check, and he was unable to pay his taxes when due. Tr. 
40-42. His federal tax debt was in a hardship or uncollectible status for a time. Tr. 39. 
 
4 
                                         
 
Applicant estimated the lien was for delinquent taxes for tax years 2009 through 2012. Tr. 
39. Applicant made some payments and discussed a payment plan with the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). Tr. 40. He completed the income statement and hoped to have 
a payment plan established soon. Tr. 41. The IRS intercepted his 2016 federal tax refund 
and state tax refunds and applied his refunds to his federal income tax debt. Tr. 43-44. 
Applicant did not provide a current statement from the IRS showing the amount owed to 
the federal government.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i is a telecommunications debt placed for collection for $63. The debt 
resulted when Applicant did not return the telecommunications company’s property. Tr. 
46. Applicant returned the property; however, the creditor failed to credit him with the 
return of the property. Tr. 47.  
 
Applicant’s February 4, 2017 credit report lists the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($10,030), 
1.b ($8,967), 1.c ($832), 1.d ($470), and 1.f ($153). GE 4. 
 
Applicant plans to pay all of his delinquent debts within five years. Tr. 52-53. 
Applicant has worked for the U.S. Government for 40 years. Tr. 54. He has held a security 
clearance for many years, and he said he would never compromise classified information. 
Tr. 54. 
 
One of Applicant’s supervisors wrote that Applicant has “impeccable job 
performance and faithful compliance” with security requirements. AE A. Applicant is 
honest, dedicated, and trustworthy. AE A. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
5 
                                         
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
6 
                                         
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes four disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” 
The record establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f).  
 
AG ¶ 20 contains financial considerations mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;4    
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
4 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
 
7 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue;   
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
Applicant’s periods of unemployment and his and his spouse’s illnesses were 
outside his control and adversely affected his finances. He is credited with mitigating the 
following SOR allegations: ¶ 1.c for $838 because he contacted the creditor, and the 
creditor was unable to locate the debt; ¶ 1.d for $470 because he did not recognize the 
debt; ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h for $334 and $153 because he is paying his medical debts and these 
two debts do not appear on his most recent credit report; and ¶ 1.i for $63 because 
Applicant returned the property to the creditor that was the basis of the debt.  
 
The following SOR debts are not mitigated because Applicant acknowledged 
responsibility for the debt and provided no documentation that he made any payments to 
address these debts: ¶ 1.a for $10,030; ¶ 1.b for $8,967; ¶ 1.f for $153; and ¶ 1.g a federal 
tax lien for $7,224.    
                                            
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
Applicant’s credit reports indicate that several of his debts are in charged-off 
status. Eventually the charged-off debts will be dropped from his credit report. “[T]hat 
some debts have dropped off his credit report is not meaningful evidence of debt 
resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 
14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015)). The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires removal 
of most negative financial items from a credit report seven years from the first date of 
delinquency or the debt becoming collection barred because of a state statute of 
limitations, whichever is longer.5 Debts may be dropped from a credit report upon dispute 
when creditors believe the debt is not going to be paid, a creditor fails to timely respond 
to a credit reporting company’s request for information, or when the debt has been 
charged off. Applicant’s failure to provide more evidence of debt resolution may preclude 
mitigation of the charged-off debts on his credit report. 
 
Applicant did not provide documentation relating to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 1.b, 
1.f, and 1.g, such as: (1) proof of payments, for example, checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish 
maintenance of contact;6 (3) copies of credible debt disputes sent to the creditor and/or 
credit reporting companies indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debt 
and why he held such a belief; (4) evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, for 
example, settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve this 
debt; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution.  
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish mitigation of financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                            
5Title 15 U.S.C. § 1681c. See Federal Trade Commission website, Summary of Fair Credit 
Reporting Act Updates at Section 605, https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0111-fair-credit-reporting-
act.pdf. 
 
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
9 
                                         
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 65 years old, and a DOD contractor has employed him as a technical 
analyst since October 2015. From September 2009 to October 2015, another technology 
company employed him. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 1974 to 1981; he 
left active service as a staff sergeant; and he received an honorable discharge. He was 
a federal civilian employee for seven years, and he worked for 18 years for a federal 
contractor. In 1969, Applicant graduated from high school. He has attended college; 
however, he has not received a degree. Applicant and his spouse’s unemployment and 
their illnesses were circumstances beyond Applicant’s control that harmed his finances. 
 
Applicant plans to pay all of his delinquent debts within five years. He has worked 
for the U.S. Government for 40 years. He has held security clearances for many years, 
and he said he would never compromise classified information. One of Applicant’s 
supervisors wrote that Applicant has “impeccable job performance and faithful 
compliance” with security requirements. Applicant is honest, dedicated, and trustworthy.   
 
The evidence against grant of a security clearance is more substantial. Applicant 
failed to mitigate four SOR debts totaling $26,374. He did not provide sufficient evidence 
of changes in his income to show he was unable to make any payments to any of these 
four SOR creditors. He provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary 
evidence of payments and an established payment plan or other mitigating information 
relating to these four SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial responsibility and 
judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More documented information 
about inability to pay debts, financial history, or financial progress is necessary to mitigate 
security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations security 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
 
10 
                                         
 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
