 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01413 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on October 
3, 2016, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on October 26, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 7, 2016. As 
of January 27, 2017, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on October 
1, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2003. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 
2002, and a master’s degree, which was awarded in 2007. He married in 2001 and 
divorced in 2008. He has two minor children.1 
  
 Applicant stopped paying his first and second mortgage loans sometime between 
2010 and 2012. A credit report from April 2016 listed the first mortgage loan as $92,332 
past due with a balance of $163,920. The second mortgage loan was listed as $21,190 
past due with a $40,980 balance. He attributed the failure to pay the mortgage loans to 
his divorce, daycare expenses, and child support. He was still living in the home when 
he submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in September 
2015.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested for driving with an open container of alcohol and driving 
under the influence (DUI) in 2011. The case was resolved through probation before 
judgment (PBJ). It is unclear how the arrest and charges affected his finances. 
Applicant went on a short trip to a foreign country as a tourist in 2013.3 
 
 Applicant wrote in his response to the SOR that the first mortgage loan had a 
zero balance due to a September 2016 foreclosure. He did not submit any supporting 
documentation. He also wrote that he was working with the holder of the second 
mortgage loan to set up a payment plan. Because he did not respond to the FORM, little 
is known about what, if any, actions Applicant has taken to address the second 
mortgage loan.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $4 delinquent debt. Applicant stated that he was unaware of 
the debt; he worked with the creditor to resolve it; and the debt has been removed from 
his credit report.5 
 
Applicant submitted SF 86s in 2005, 2010, and September 2015.6 On the 2015 
SF 86, he answered “Yes” to the following financial questions under Section 26: 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
3 Items 3, 6. The SOR did not allege that Applicant was arrested for open container and DUI. Any matter 
that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered for 
the effect on Applicant’s finances, when assessing his credibility, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and during the whole-person analysis.  
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Items 3, 7, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor 
or guarantor). 
 
Applicant reported a $375 debt that was settled and paid in September 2015.  
 
 Applicant answered “No” to the remaining financial questions under Section 26, 
which included the following: 
 
Other than previously listed, are there any other instances of the following 
occurrences: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you defaulted on any type of loan. (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor 
or guarantor).7 
 
You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor).8   
 
Applicant did not report his first and second mortgage loans, which had been 
delinquent for several years. He was interviewed for his background investigation in 
October 2015. He discussed his defaulted mortgage loan. He thought he owed about 
$116,000 on the loan. He stated that he did not list the defaulted mortgage loan on the 
SF 86 because of an oversight.9 He wrote in response to SOR ¶ 2.a (falsification 
allegation): 
 
I accept. I was in the process of applying for mortgage relief. However 
mortgage was sold several times and finally sold at foreclosure. I was not 
aware of 1.b (second mortgage loan), [and] 1.c ($4 debt). 
 
                                                          
7 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified this question.  
 
8 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified this question.  
 
9 Item 5. 
 
4 
 
Applicant may not have known about the $4 debt, and it had been so long since 
he paid the mortgage loans, that he may have forgotten that there were two loans. 
However, after considering all the evidence, including Applicant’s age, education, 
experience, and the straightforward nature of the question, I find that Applicant 
intentionally falsified the SF 86 when he failed to report his defaulted first mortgage 
loan. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his mortgage loans. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $4 delinquent debt. Applicant stated that he was unaware of 
the debt; he worked with the creditor to resolve it; and the debt has been removed from 
his credit report. That debt does not rise to the level of a security concern. SOR ¶ 1.c is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant attributed the failure to pay the mortgage loans to his divorce, daycare 
expenses, and child support. It is unclear how the 2011 open container arrest and DUI 
charges affected his finances, and he went on a short trip to a foreign country as a 
tourist in 2013. He continued to live in the house for years without paying the mortgage 
loans. He stated, without documentation, that the first mortgage loan had a zero 
balance due to a September 2016 foreclosure, and that he was working with the holder 
of the second mortgage loan to set up a payment plan. Because he did not respond to 
the FORM, little is known about what, if any, actions Applicant has taken to address the 
second mortgage loan. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 
7 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his September 2015 SF 86 when he failed to 
report his defaulted first mortgage loan. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant discussed his defaulted mortgage loan when he was interviewed for his 
background investigation in October 2015. However, having determined that Applicant 
intentionally provided false information on the SF 86, I have also determined that his 
explanation to the investigator that the omission was unintentional was also false. 
Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
long work history. However, he has unresolved financial problems, and he intentionally 
provided false information about his finances on an SF 86. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
