 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03082 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
10/17/2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his tax-related financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. Specifically, the SOR 
alleged that Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2012 thru 2015. 
 
On December 15, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), admitting that 
he had failed to file the tax returns for the years in question. He also provided an 
explanation as to why he did not file and provided documentation. He disclosed the 
SOR allegation 1.a and 1.b on his December 2, 2015 security clearance application.  He 
requested a determination on the administrative (written) record. 
 
 On January 24, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of eight items. On 
 
2 
 
March 6, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals received Applicant’s FORM 
Response. On October 1, 2017, I was assigned Applicant’s case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 40, earned a bachelor’s degree in 1999. He was first granted a 
security clearance in 1999, and has been employed as a federal contractor since he 
began working for his current employer in 1999. (Item 2) He is single and has no 
children. 
 
 Applicant, in response to relevant questions, reported on his June 2015 security 
clearance application that he failed to file his 2012 to 2014 federal and state income tax 
returns for a number of reasons. He was emphatic that this does not justify or excuse 
his behavior of not timely filing tax returns. He documented that his parents were 
severely injured in 1969 and his father sustained a traumatic brain injury. In 2010, his 
father worsened to the point that he lost much of his cognitive skills. At the same time, 
Applicant, who lived in another state, and traveled extensively for work, attempted to 
care for his father. He admits that it was a challenge to concentrate and keep up with 
financial obligations. (Item 4) He also reported that in 2011, his mother had routine 
surgery, which led to complications. She was in ICU and then in rehabilitation for six 
months and on a feeding tube for one year. Applicant and his sister went to the family 
home to care for his mother and father. From 2012 through 2014, Applicant’s father’s  
conditioned worsened, and  he died in 2015. Applicant was constantly stressed by his 
family situation and wanted to be a good son. He realized in 2012, that he was 
depressed and sought medical counsel. (Response to FORM) He continues with 
counseling. 
 
Applicant knows the lapse in judgment concerning the taxes was attributed to the 
depression and anxiety. The combination of stressful factors led to not sleeping and 
lack of concentration. He managed to keep his position and has had no incidents at 
work for 17 years. He admits the behavior is unacceptable and sought help so that 
these events will not recur. He provided documentation concerning his medical 
condition and treatment. (Response to FORM) He realizes that he could have asked for 
an extension to file federal and state returns, but he did not. He also knew that he would 
be getting refunds due to the number of exemptions. He does not owe the federal or 
state any money and needed no payment plan.  He filed his 2016 income tax return 
timely in February 2017.  (Response to FORM)  
 
In November 2015, Applicant filed his 2012-2014 federal and state income tax 
returns, which he disclosed on his security clearance application. He filed his 2015 
income tax returns in 2016. As noted above, he has filed his 2016 income tax returns 
already.  
 
 Applicant’s 2017 credit bureau report does not show any delinquent accounts. 
(Item 8) He admits that his 2010 credit report had some collection accounts. (Item 7).  
 
 
 
3 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
June 8, 2017, through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to 
classified information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. See e.g. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (Aug. 2, 
2017) (Board reversed favorable decision where Department Counsel failed to present 
evidence to substantiate allegations, which applicant had denied). Applicants are 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative 
judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a 
reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same 
record.” Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national 
security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held 
that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal and state income tax returns raises the 
financial considerations security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all pertinent disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file . . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns . . . as required; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
 An applicant who fails to timely file or pay his or her taxes, a basic and 
fundamental financial obligation of all citizens, bears a heavy burden in mitigating the 
financial considerations security concern.1 An administrative judge should closely 
examine the circumstances giving rise to an applicant’s tax-related issues and his or her 
response to it. Furthermore, an applicant’s claim of financial reform must be weighed 
against the overriding concerns about the individual’s lack of judgment and history of 
not abiding by rules and regulations in failing to timely file or pay their taxes.2 
 
 Here, Applicant presented documentary proof that he filed his late tax returns. He 
also acknowledged that this was a severe lapse of judgment and happened while trying 
to care take his mother and father and continue with his profession. He volunteered the 
information on his security clearance application. He owed no taxes and received 
refunds.  Applicant submitted evidence from which I  find that his late tax filings were an 
aberrational event or that  is unlikely to recur. He was so depressed and stressed that 
he found himself in the emergency room. He sought medical help. He stated that he has 
learned from his past mistakes and the environment is no longer so stressful. As noted 
above, he has already filed his 2016 income tax return. In short, Applicant’s past failure 
to timely file his federal and state income tax returns were due to extreme stress from 
his parents’ medical situations. I do not have questions about his present judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
 
Under the circumstances presented by this case, I find that Applicant established 
the above-listed mitigating conditions. I also find that he met his heavy burden of proof 
and persuasion to continue his eligibility for a security clearance. The security concerns 
raised by his past failure to timely file his federal income tax returns do not remain.  
Applicant’s admitted failure to have done so for a number of years might be sufficient to 
raise a concern that he may be unwilling to follow other rules and regulations, if not for 
the extreme stress that he was dealing with. He did not ignore that stress and sought 
help. He has handled classified information for 17 years without incident. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for 
continued access to classified information.3 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues). 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 14-05794 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016); 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016); ISCR Case No. 12-09545 (App. Bd. Dec. 21, 2015). 
 
3 In reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person factors in AG ¶ 2(d), including that Applicant 
has held a security clearance for over 17 years and self-reported the information at issue, as well as other 
potentially adverse information.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.b:     For  Applicant 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security to continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
