 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00698 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 17, 
2014. On June 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 17, 2016, and requested a decision 
on the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on October 17, 2016. On October 18, 2017, a complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 through 6, was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on 
December 1, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 
2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 3, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on September 3, 2015. The PSI was not authenticated as required by 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to 
comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, 
deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. I conclude that he waived any objections to the PSI summary by failing to 
respond to the FORM. “Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, 
they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the 
Directive.” ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
I reopened the record on October 18, 2017, because a list of debts referred to in 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR was not in the record. Applicant submitted additional 
documents, which were admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, without 
objection from Department Counsel. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX A 
through D are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits I and II. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he did not specifically admit or deny any of the 
allegations, but he provided explanations for the debts alleged in the SOR. His 
explanations are included in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old retired Army officer. He graduated from college in June 
1990 with a bachelor’s degree in economics. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army 
from February 1992 to July 2014 and retired as a lieutenant colonel. (Item 3 at 5.) Since 
August 2014, he has been employed by a defense contractor as a training integrator. 
He has held a security clearance since October 1992.  
 
 Applicant married in January 1995 and divorced in January 2014. He and his ex-
wife had four children, now ages 21, 20, 19, and 14. Applicant was awarded custody of 
the children when they separated in 2010.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed numerous debts related to his 
marital breakup. The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling about $163,926. The 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
largest debt is a delinquent mortgage loan on the marital home, which is alleged to be 
past due in the amount of $151,496.  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he attributed his divorce to his ex-wife’s 
infidelity, excessive consumption of alcohol, and failure to pay the family debts while he 
was deployed to Iraq in 2008-09. He states that his ex-wife was arrested twice for 
driving under the influence (DUI) while the custody of the children was in binding 
arbitration. She was arrested for DUI two more times and spent eight months in jail 
before the divorce was granted.  
 
The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.k are reflected in credit reports 
from January 2015, January 2016, and October 2016. (Items 4, 5, and 6.) The unpaid 
property taxes alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l are not reflected in the credit reports, but Applicant 
disclosed them in his SCA. (Item 2 at 36-37.) The evidence concerning these debts is 
summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: real estate mortgage loan, past due for $151,496, with a loan 
balance of $265,067. Applicant purchased the marital family home in 2005, and it was 
in Applicant’s name only because his wife had a poor credit record. While he was 
deployed in Iraq, his family moved to another state, and the marital home was rented. 
While he was deployed, his wife failed to make the mortgage loan payments on the 
marital home, which were delinquent for about $12,000 when he returned from 
deployment.  
 
After Applicant and his wife separated in 2010, he moved back into the marital 
home with his children, and his wife remained in the other state, living in a home that 
Applicant also owned. He could not afford to maintain two households, and he fell 
behind on his debt payments. In 2013, after his application for a loan modification was 
denied, and the lender refused to approve a short sale, he was advised by a real estate 
agent to allow the property to go into foreclosure. He moved out of the marital home to a 
rental property in July 2014, where he now lives with his fiancée and one of his children. 
(Item 2 at 7; Item 3 at 5.) There is no evidence that he made any further attempts to 
resolve the delinquent mortgage loan for the marital home.  
 
As of the date of Applicant’s answer to the SOR, the marital home was vacant. 
He had made no payments, and the lender had not foreclosed. The record does not 
reflect whether he was prohibited from living in the marital home instead of incurring the 
additional expense of renting another home. 
 
After I reopened the record, Applicant stated that the marital home had been 
sold, and he and his ex-wife each received about $14,000 from the sale, which he used 
to pay other debts. (AX A.) He submitted no documentation regarding the sale or 
disbursement of the proceeds. He learned about the sale in early 2017, when one of his 
children noticed that the property was being renovated, and it was listed as a rental 
property about two months later. (AX B.) 
 
 
 4
 SOR ¶ 1.b: joint credit-card account, charged off for $4,475. When Applicant 
and his then wife separated, an arbitrator allocated responsibility for several debts 
incurred during the marriage. The arbitrator’s decision reflects that the parties agreed to 
equally split five joint debts, including this debt, and one individual debt in Applicant’s 
name only. (AX A at 3.) Applicant and his wife agreed on which joint debts each party 
would settle. According to Applicant, his then wife reneged on her agreement to resolve 
this debt, and he has not resolved it even though he remains legally liable for it. (Item 6 
at 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: debt for satellite television service, placed for collection of 
$1,180. This debt was for unreturned equipment. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he 
stated that he returned the equipment in 2015. The October 2016 credit report reflects 
that the debt is resolved. (Item 6 at 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: telecommunication debt, placed for collection of $325. In 
Applicant’s answer, he states that this was his ex-wife’s debt from her residence, but 
she refused to pay it. The credit report from October 2016 reflects that it is an individual 
debt in Applicant’s name. (Item 6 at 2.) It is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f: satellite television service debt, placed for collection of 
about $293. These debts are duplicates. Applicant states that this debt was for 
television service in his ex-wife’s apartment. He states that he cosigned for the 
apartment but not for the television service. His ex-wife refuses to pay the bill. The 
January 2015 credit report reflects that both accounts were individual accounts in his 
name. (Item 4 at 7.) The October 2016 credit report reflects that both debts are unpaid 
(Item 6 at 1-2.).  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: copayment for dental bill of $156. Applicant states that this debt 
was incurred by his ex-wife after they separated. It is listed in the January 2015 credit 
report as an individual debt in Applicant’s name that was referred for collection in 
December 2014. (Item 4 at 9.) The January 2016 credit report lists the debt as past due 
but does not reflect a past-due amount. (Item 5 at 2.) It is not listed in the October 2016 
credit report. Since less than seven years have elapsed since the debt was referred for 
collection, it apparently was resolved.3  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: credit-card account, charged off for $154. Applicant states that he 
closed this account in 2010 and was never been informed of the delinquency. He 
suspects that any correspondence was sent to his old address, where his ex-wife 
resided. The January 2015 credit report reflects that the debt was charged off in March 
2009, and it would have “aged off” his credit record after seven years. He presented no 
evidence that he contacted the creditor or disputed the debt. It is not resolved. 
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged 
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute 
of limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
 5
 SOR ¶ 1.i: water bill for $57. This delinquent debt was for service at the family 
residence alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. It is unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: collection account for $81. Applicant states that he has been unable 
to identify this debt. The January 2015 credit report lists the address of the collection 
agency, but Applicant presented no evidence of any efforts to identify the debt or 
dispute it with the collection agency or the credit bureau. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k: collection account for $2,417. The credit report from January 2015 
reflects that this is a medical debt. (Item 4 at 9.) However, Applicant states it was a debt 
for a security service in the residence alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He states that he cancelled 
the service and stopped the automatic bank withdrawals for payment, but the company 
changed hands and the new owners had no record of the service cancellation. The 
service could not function after the contract was cancelled because the electricity was 
turned off. Applicant has not disputed this debt with the creditor or the credit bureau. 
The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: unpaid property taxes for $3,000. This debt is related to the 
residence alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s payments on the mortgage loan included an 
escrow account for payment of property taxes. He did not address this debt in his 
answer to the SOR. It is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant has not submitted any information about his current income and 
expenses. Thus, it is not possible to realistically assess whether he is financially able to 
resolve the debts alleged in the SOR. He contacted a credit counseling firm in 
November 2014, but he decided that the firm “was not a good fit,” and he did not receive 
any counseling. (Item 3 at 9.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
 6
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
 7
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The same debt is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. When the same conduct is 
alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations 
should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 
21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I have resolved the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.f in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record establish 
three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to 
file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to 
pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”) is not established, because 
the debt in this case is for state property taxes, not income taxes. However, the tax debt 
is encompassed in AG¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
 8
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are recent, unresolved, and 
numerous, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant marital breakup and his ex-wife’s 
financial irresponsibility were conditions beyond his control, but he has not provided 
evidence of responsible conduct. There is no evidence that he contacted the lender for 
the former family home, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, after his application for a loan 
modification was denied in 2013, and no evidence of any efforts to resolve the debts 
related to the home, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.l. He provided no evidence of efforts to 
resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e and 1.f (duplicates), 1.h, and 1.i-1.k. Even if 
the home was sold as Applicant states in AX B, the fact remains that he took no action 
to resolve the delinquent loan after 2013. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are not established. Applicant submitted no 
documentary evidence of counseling, payment plans, payments, or disputes regarding 
any of the unpaid debts. In his SCA, he stated that he was working with a credit 
specialist to resolve his delinquent debts. (Item 2 at 37.) In the September 2015 PSI, he 
told an investigator that he contacted a credit counselor in November 2014, but he took 
no further action after the initial contact. There is no evidence of counseling and his 
financial situation is not yet under control. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case 
No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) It is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Applicant walked away from the marital home in 2013. He had no plan and took no 
actions to resolve the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a or the related debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 
1.l. Even though he is jointly liable for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, he has no plan and 
has taken no steps to resolve it. He is individually liable for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d, 1.e and 1.f (duplicates), 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j, but he has taken no steps to resolve them.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
 9
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I have noted Applicant’s long 
record of honorable military service and his years of holding a security clearance 
without incident. He presented no evidence regarding his performance in his current 
position.  
 
Applicant was responsive to my inquiries after I reopened the record. However, 
because he requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no 
opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case 
No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 10
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
