 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02130 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline C (foreign 
preference) and Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, revising the 2006 AGs. The revised AG apply to all 
adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision on the 
newly effective AG. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on December 21, 2016. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 3, 2017, and had 30 days to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant responded on January 26, 2017, by 
providing a two-page-typed statement plus attachments including copies of his U.S. and 
Canadian passports and an e-mail dated January 23, 2017. This response was marked 
as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and it was admitted into evidence without objection. The 
Government’s documents, identified as Items 1 through 6, were also admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about China or the Peoples Republic of China (PRC). Item 6. The 
request and the attached source documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning the PRC.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE I source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts 
are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts gleaned from HE 1. 
 
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China's 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail. 
 
3 
 
 In assessing the military and security developments in China, the DOD has 
reported that: Chinese actors are the world's most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic 
information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent 
threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat will evolve with 
continuing technological advances in the global information environment. Chinese 
leaders are focused on developing the capabilities they deem necessary to deter or 
defeat adversary power projection and counter third-party including U.S. intervention 
during a crisis or conflict. China's military modernization is producing capabilities that 
have the potential to reduce core U.S. military technological advantages. 
 
Further, the DOD found that China very likely uses its intelligence services and 
employs other illicit approaches that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key 
national security and export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other 
materials unobtainable through other means. China is using its cyber capabilities to 
support intelligence collection against the U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense 
industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense programs. China uses state-
sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase the level of technologies and 
expertise available to support military research, development, and acquisition. 
 
The organizational network of China's military-industrial complex is such that the 
People's Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access sensitive and dual-use technologies or 
knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research and development. China has 
in place a long-term, comprehensive military-modernization program designed to 
improve its armed forces' capacity to fight short-duration, high-intensity-regional 
conflicts and, as China's global footprint and international interests grow, its military 
modernization program has become progressively more focused on investments for a 
range of missions beyond China's periphery. 
 
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported: Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese 
government has conducted large-scale cyber-espionage against the United States. 
China has compromised a range of U.S. networks, including those of DoD, defense 
contractors, and private enterprises. China's material incentives for continuing this 
activity are immense and unlikely to be altered by small scale U.S. actions. China's 
progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to China's substantial and 
sustained investment in defense research and development (R&D). China's large-scale, 
state-sponsored theft of intellectual property and proprietary information also has 
allowed China to fill knowledge gaps in its domestic defense and commercial R&D. 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China, the U.S. Department 
of State reported: The People's Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in 
which the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members 
hold almost all top government and security apparatus positions. Repression and 
coercion have markedly increased recently, particularly against organizations and 
 
4 
 
individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy, and public interest and ethnic 
minority issues, and against law firms that took on sensitive cases. 
 
Human rights concerns that were observed included: extralegal measures to 
prevent public expression of critical opinions; repression of free speech, religion, 
association, assembly and movement for certain minorities; extrajudicial killings; 
enforced disappearance and incommunicado detention, including prolonged detentions 
in "black jails"; torture and coerced confessions of prisoners; detention and harassment 
of individuals who sought to peacefully exercise their rights under the law; a lack of due 
process; searches of premises without warrants; monitoring of communications; 
opening of domestic and international mail; as well as severe restrictions on citizens' 
freedom of association and free speech.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. He was born in PRC and moved to Canada in 1987 to 
attend graduate school. He obtained Canadian citizenship in 1993. He reports obtaining 
a doctorate degree in chemistry from a Chinese University in 1994, and a master’s 
degree in information technology from a Canadian University in 1997. Applicant came to 
the United States in January 1998 for employment. He was naturalized on March 5, 
2010 and he has been employed as a senior-software-engineer for a federal contractor 
since April 2014. He is applying for a security clearance for the first time.  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SCA) on 
June 10, 2014.2 In section 18 of his SCA, he disclosed his siblings, including two 
adopted brothers, and an adopted sister, who are citizens and residents of the PRC. All 
three siblings work in the banking industry in the PRC and have never had any affiliation 
with the PRC government. Applicant last had in-person contacts with his siblings at his 
mother’s funeral in the PRC in March 2014. His father had previously passed away in 
2010. He has telephonic contact with brother one only once every few months (seven 
phone calls during all of 2015 and 2016), and with brother two quarterly. He has contact 
with his sister annually. Applicant has no other contact, via e-mail or otherwise, with his 
siblings. He also disclosed his foreign travel in his SCA including trips to the PRC in 
2007, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014. He traveled to Canada 12 times after 
becoming a U.S. citizen, using his Canadian passport to enter Canada each time.  
 
 Applicant has been married since 1983 and he reports no military service. 
Applicant has worked in the United States for almost 20 years, with no issues. He has 
no contact with foreign governments and he has no sympathy, preference for, or 
alliance with foreign nationals. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR under 
Guidelines B and C. He disclosed his possession of a Canadian passport in his SCA. 
He used it to come to the United States and renewed it in September 2015, with an 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated June 10, 2014 (Item 3) and the summary of his clearance interview by a 
clearance investigator on March 16, 2015. (Item 4) 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
5 
 
expiration date in September 2020. His intent was to only use this passport for travel to 
Canada. In his October 2016 Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated his willingness to 
surrender this passport, and described his previous efforts to do so. He has now 
produced evidence in the form of a January 23, 2017 e-mail from his facilities security 
officer, attached to his Response to the FORM, showing that he did surrender the 
Canadian passport in January 2017.  
  
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
           The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9, as follows: 
 
The Concern. When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she 
may provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about 
an individual's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in 
conflict with U.S. national interests or when the individual acts to conceal 
it. By itself; the fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country 
is not disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or 
attempt at concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of 
any right or privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or 
obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
include: 
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
           (c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; and 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a           
foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign     
citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
 
7 
 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen; 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do  
not present a national security concern; and 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk; 
 
Applicant traveled to Canada roughly 12 times after becoming a U.S. 
citizen in 2010. He possessed the Canadian passport for convenience sake, to 
facilitate entry to Canada. He never used the Canadian passport for any other 
purpose. Canada is not hostile to the United States, and dual-citizenship with 
Canada, or travel to and from Canada, presents no conflict with U.S. national 
security interests. In any event, Applicant surrendered the Canadian passport to 
his FSO in January 2017. He has indicated no continuing allegiance to Canada. 
The mitigating conditions above at AG ¶ 11 apply. I find that Applicant has 
expressed no preference for a foreign country over the United States.   
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
 
8 
 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s siblings are citizens and residents of the PRC. PRC is continuously 
engaged in cyber-espionage against the United States, economic espionage, and 
human rights abuses. Applicant’s foreign contacts may create a potential conflict of 
interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
9 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.3  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1998. He became a U.S. citizen in 2010. 
He is married and has been employed in the U.S. for nearly 20 years. He appears to be 
a solid citizen. He has longstanding relationships and loyalties here. Although he has 
siblings in the PRC, which is an authoritarian regime, his contact with them is de-
minimis. He continues to have only fleeting, occasional contact with his family members 
in the PRC. There is no indication that they are affiliated with the Chinese government 
or intelligence services. Applicant is committed to his new life here. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and 
(c) are applicable to the PRC family members contacts, which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
2.a. Because Applicant’s ties to the PRC are minimal and inconsequential, I find that all 
foreign influence concerns have been mitigated.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
10 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:              For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:                        For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph a:                                       For Applicant 
 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
         ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
