 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00458 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and H (drug involvement and substance misuse). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E and H. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 26, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on November 14, 2016. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 6, 2016. 
He responded to the FORM with an affidavit and three attached documents marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and A(1) through A(3). The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
October 1, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM, AE A, and AE A(1) 
through A(3) are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
the same employer since 1997. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has 
held since around 1997. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 1982. He 
has never married, and he has no children.1 
  
 Applicant smoked marijuana when he was in college. He stopped smoking 
marijuana after college, but he resumed in the mid-to-late 1980s. He stopped smoking 
marijuana again in 1998. He resumed smoking marijuana in about 2010. He smoked 
marijuana about once a week with a friend who provided the marijuana. He held a 
security clearance at the time.2 
 
 Applicant stopped smoking marijuana after he was arrested for driving under the 
influence (DUI) in November 2014. He wrote in his response to the FORM: “I would like 
to state unambiguously that I have absolutely quit the use of marijuana and solemnly 
swear that I have no intention of ever consuming that substance again.3 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) in October 2003. He 
was required to disclose any marijuana use within the previous seven years. He 
intentionally failed to disclose his marijuana use from October 1996 through 1998.4 
 
Applicant submitted another SF 86 in April 2014. He intentionally falsified the SF 
86 when he failed to disclose his marijuana use from about 2010 through the time he 
submitted the SF 86 and his marijuana use while holding a security clearance.5 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in February 2016. 
When asked if he had used any illegal drugs in the past seven years, he immediately 
admitted that he had. He fully disclosed his marijuana use. He admitted lying on his SF 
86 because he did not want to jeopardize his security clearance. He felt bad about lying, 
and he wanted to be honest.6 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 5. 
 
2 Items 2, 5. 
 
3 Items 2, 5. AE A. The SOR did not allege that Applicant was arrested for DUI. Any matter that was not 
alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered in the application 
of mitigating conditions and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
4 Items 2, 4. 
 
5 Items 2, 3, 5. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted performance appraisals and other documents reflecting his 
excellent job performance. He is praised for his judgment, professionalism, and 
integrity.7  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
7 AE A, A(1)-A(3).  
 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG 
¶ 24:   
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
 
5 
 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana since his DUI arrest in November 2014. He 
promises to refrain from marijuana use in the future. However, he has stopped smoking 
marijuana in the past for extended periods and then resumed. He smoked marijuana 
regularly from 2010 through November 2014. He did so while holding a security 
clearance, and he continued to do so after lying about his marijuana use on his April 
2014 SF 86. 
 
 Applicant appears to be sincere, but that is insufficient to mitigate the well-
established pattern of illegal drug use. His conduct continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable, and AG ¶ 
26(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
6 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his 2003 and 2014 SF 86s when he failed to 
report his marijuana use, and he additionally falsified the 2014 SF 86 when he failed to 
disclose his marijuana use while holding a security clearance. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.  
 
Applicant smoked marijuana while holding a security clearance. His conduct 
reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 
16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly applicable because Applicant’s conduct is 
sufficient for an adverse determination under the drug involvement and substance 
misuse guideline. However, the general concerns about questionable judgment and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are 
established. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
7 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant disclosed his marijuana use during his background interview in 
February 2016. It is positive that Applicant finally stopped his lies, but that cannot be 
considered a “prompt” correction. Under the same rationale discussed above for drug 
involvement and substance misuse, I find that Applicant’s conduct continues to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find that personal 
conduct concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and H in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s long and stable work history, his favorable character 
evidence, and his reporting his marijuana use during his February 2016 background 
interview. However, that does not overcome his history of illegal drug abuse while 
holding a security clearance and his two false SF 86s.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E and H.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
