 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                          1 )  ISCR Case No. 16-00367 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 2, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.2 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 15, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 28, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
                                                          
1  When Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in July of 2013, he changed first name. (Applicant’s 
Exhibit I.) 
2 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
on November 28, 2016, scheduling the hearing for December 1, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit (HX) I for Administrative Notice. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented 16 documents, which I 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through P. They were admitted without 
objection. The record was left open until January 30, 2017, for receipt of additional 
documentation. On January 19, 2017, Applicant offered AppXs Q throughV, which were 
admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on 
December 13, 2016. The record was closed on January 30, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a seven-page summary of 
the facts, supported by five Government documents pertaining to Afghanistan, identified 
as HE I. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.e.~1.g. He denied 
SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 6.) 
He has been employed, on and off, with the defense contractor as a linguist since 
August of 2006. (GX 1 at pages 20~38.) 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence  
  
 1.a. and 1.g. Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan.  (TR at 
page 34 line 21 to page 35 line 1.) He was employed by an “Afghan Ministry,” but retired 
in May of 2016. (TR at page 36 line 17 to page 37 line 3, and AppX Q at page 6.) 
Applicant’s father received a onetime retirement payment from the Afghan government, 
is unemployed, and, in part, is supported by Applicant. (TR at page 37 lines 10~19, and 
at page 60 lines 11~17.) Periodically, Applicant sends his father between $200~$500. 
(TR at page 60 lines 11~25.) He has applied to immigrate to the United States, as 
evidenced by U.S. State Department documentation, and is currently awaiting a subject 
interview by the State Department. (TR at page 57 lines 1~24, and AppX Q.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant’s stepmother is a citizen of Afghanistan, but resides in the United 
States. (TR at page 37 line 20 to page 38 line 8.) This is evidenced by her “green card,” 
and her “Social Security” card. (TR at page 38 lines 7~15, and AppX Q at page 8.) She 
is not employed by the Afghan government, but rather works for a municipality in the 
United States. (TR at page 38 line 16 to page 39 line 4.) 
 
3 
 
 1.c. and 1.e. Applicant has two sisters. The “oldest sister . . . is an elementary 
teacher with a private school in Kabul, Afghanistan, that has no association with the 
Afghanistan government.” (TR at page 39 lines 11~22.) She is unmarried, and lives with 
Applicant’s father. (TR at page 61 lines 15~23.)  Applicant’s younger sister, and her 
husband, live in the United States, as evidenced by their “green cards,” and Applicant’s 
brother-in-law works for a U.S. IT corporation. (TR at page 39 line 25 to page 40 line 14, 
and AppX Q at page 9.) This brother-in-law never worked for the Afghan Ministry of 
Defense, as alleged, but rather “for a U.S. Government–funded project.” (TR at page 44 
line 25 to page 44 line 23.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant has two brothers. The oldest is unemployed, “has applied for a job 
to become a linguist with the U.S. Army in Afghanistan.” (TR at page 42 lines 13~24.) 
Applicant’s youngest brother is a student, currently living in Germany, as evidenced by 
his German residency card. (TR at page 41 line 12 to page 42 line 13.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant’s uncle is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He is employed by 
the Afghan National Directorate of Security. (TR at page 44 line 24 to page 46 line 19.) 
He has little contact with this uncle, only twice a year, a curtesy phone call during a 
twice a year Moslem holiday. (Id.) They do not discuss their respective employment. 
(TR at page 46 lines 9~14.) 
  
Notice 
 
 Afghanistan faces a continuing treat from the Taliban insurgency and extremist 
networks. The border between Afghanistan and Pakistan remains an extremist safe 
haven providing sanctuary for these groups. The Taliban insurgency continues its 
attempts to inspire Afghan security personnel to conduct insider attacks as a means to 
undermine trust between the international coalition and its Afghan partners. A U.S. 
State Department Travel Warning for Afghanistan remains in effect.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant‘s father, oldest sister and oldest brother are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest 
 
 Applicant’s father is awaiting approval for immigration to the United States. His 
sister works for a private school, and his brother is seeking employment with the U.S. 
Army in Afghanistan. As such, the Afghan government has little influence over them, 
and Applicant’s loyalties are clearly with the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working for the U.S. Armed Forces in 
Afghanistan, as evidenced by numerous accolades and letters of recommendation. 
(AppXs D and I.) As such, I am convinced that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States due to his obvious ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
