 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02321 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his financial circumstances. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 On November 2, 2016, 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) and requested a determination on the 
administrative (written) record. He denied or disputed the delinquent accounts listed on 
the SOR, and stated that he is working with a credit repair company.  
 
 On February 2, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
                                                          
1 The CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The CAF 
adjudicated this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, which were applicable for 
all cases falling under the jurisdiction of the Directive between September 1, 2006 and June 7, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant five exhibits (Items 1 – 5) that the Government offers for 
admission into the record.  
 
 On March 22, 2017, Applicant submitted a response to the FORM (Response). 
The Response consists of two letters of reference from his employment, which he offers 
for admission into the record.  (AX A-B) In his Answer, he attached two pages from the 
credit repair company he is working with to resolve his credit. (Item 2) On October 1, 
2017, I was assigned the case. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative 
criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to 
classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.”2 The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found 
in Appendix A to SEAD 4, are to be used in all security clearance decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017.3 Accordingly, I have applied the current version of the adjudicative 
guidelines.4 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance 
decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 61, is currently working for a contractor supporting the U.S. 
Government. He served in the U.S. military from 1974 to 1988, and was honorably 
discharged. He is married and has three children. He has held a security clearance in 
the past. He completed his security clearance application in June 2015. (Item 3) 
 
 In his answer, Applicant stated that the financial hardships were the result of 
unemployment and illness for himself in 2010, and his wife’s not working for a year in 
2014, in addition to her diagnosis of breast cancer and extensive treatments. She has 
undergone surgery and many intensive treatments. (Item 2) His wife did not work for 
about six months in 2010 and did not work for about a year in 2014. 
 
 In response to questions in his SCA about his financial record, Applicant 
answered “yes” to a failure to file and pay his 2011 state income tax due to illness. He 
stated that he paid all taxes and penalties in 2013. The credit report in the file does not 
reflect any unpaid state taxes. (SOR 1.m) He also responded “yes” to delinquency 
involving routine accounts, and included the foreclosure on his home in 2011. He listed 
credit-card debts and a loan that he co-signed for his daughter. (Item 3) 
                                                          
2 SEAD 4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
3 SEAD 4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
4 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines and my ultimate 
decision in this case would have been the same.  
 
3 
 
 
 In his 2015 investigative interview, Applicant discussed his home foreclosure in 
2011. He explained that when he purchased the home, he was told that he could 
refinance in five years and by then he would have sufficient equity in the home. He was 
given a loan with no down payment. When he asked the mortgage company to 
refinance, his monthly mortgage payment increased, such that he could not afford the 
payment. He asked for a loan modification and was refused. At the same time, he was 
ill and could not work. (Item 5) The bank refused to make any arrangements with 
Applicant. He was advised to stop payments and the mortgage company would 
refinance or make a loan modification. Instead, the company auctioned the house after 
Applicant missed four payments. He was provided with a $400 settlement from the 
mortgage company based on a “predatory loan.” (Item 5) Based on that settlement, he 
believes he does not owe anything after the foreclosure. (SOR 1.i) 
 
 Applicant submitted information to show that the SOR accounts that he disputed 
with the credit company have been deleted. These include the alleged debt at SOR 1.d, 
1.f, 1.g, and 1.c. The document shows that eleven accounts have been deleted since 
the file investigation began. The account at SOR 1.b is believed to be a duplicate of 
SOR 1.d. (Attachments to Answer, Item 2) The account in 1.l shows a zero balance on 
the credit report. (Item 5) 
 
 As to the charged-off student loan account in SOR 1.a in the amount of $10,720, 
Applicant co-signed a loan for his daughter. The credit report in the file shows that the 
amount is now past due in the amount of $716. He stated that he has been diligently 
addressing this account. The credit report shows a lower balance and a monthly 
payment amount of $102. (Item 4) 
 
  The credit report in the file is from 2015. It does reflect the other alleged 
delinquencies, but it also clearly shows that prior to the medical issues and 
unemployment, Applicant had at least 15 accounts that note “pays as agreed.” Any 
efforts that Applicant has made since 2015 would not be noted on that older credit 
report. 
 
 Applicant submitted two letters of recommendation from employers who have 
known him for 18 years. The first letter attested to the fact that Applicant has worked 
with sensitive information in many areas. He is respectful of privacy, classified 
information, rules and restrictions.  Applicant  has never had any security incidents and 
is a mentor to the junior staff. He is trusted and has never done anything to create 
doubts about his trustworthiness. (AX A) 
 
The second letter attests to Applicant’s judgment and his reasonable attempts  to 
satisfy his debts. The writer has known Applicant for 18 years and knows that he 
provides for his family. He has no criminal record.  Applicant responsibly paid his debts 
until the hardships that occurred a few years ago. His wife is still battling breast cancer. 
His wife was the main provider, and now Applicant’s income must suffice. The writer 
witnessed Applicant’s efforts to obtain a credit repair company to help him. Also, he 
 
4 
 
knows that Applicant has settled some debts and is doing all that he can do. He has 
protected classified information and will continue to do so. (AX B) 
 
In the FORM, the Government through counsel acknowledged that additional 
information supporting a whole-person analysis that Applicant is an individual of 
honorable character who exercises sound judgment and is suited to safeguard 
classified information could be considered in this case. Counsel elaborated that the 
issue in the case is not whether Applicant has paid all his debts or otherwise resolved 
them. The issue is whether the financial circumstances raise security concerns. (FORM 
at 2) Applicant provided such information to mitigate any concerns in response to the 
FORM. 
 
At the time of the 2015 investigative interview, Applicant earned about $47,000 a 
year and his wife returned to employment. Her earnings were $51,000 annually. There 
was a budget and discretionary income at the end of a month. (Item 5)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD  4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges make certain that applicants: (a) receive fair notice of the 
issues, (b) have a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) are not 
subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In deciding a case, a judge must resolve any doubt raised by the 
evidence in favor of the national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Moreover, 
the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .5  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other 
illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and 
other qualities essential to protecting classified information.6 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts . . .; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG Ᵽ19(f):   failure to timely file or pay…. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, . . . or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial 
counseling for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt-collection process. Instead, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles his or her personal 
financial obligations to assess how they may handle their security responsibilities.7 
Moreover, the resolution of past financial issues alone without evidence of true reform 
and rehabilitation is of limited probative value in the security clearance context.8  
 
Applicant’s history of timely payments on his debts and the circumstances that 
occurred beyond his control led to the financial issues. He denied the tax issue and he 
disclosed on his SCA that he filed and paid the taxes and penalties in 2013. It does not 
appear that he has a tax liability on his credit report. He disputed other debts and 
obtained a company to help him resolve the issues. He explained the situation about his 
home foreclosure.  He sought guidance and continues to diligently address his debts. 
His 2015 credit report reflects numerous accounts that are current. AG ¶¶ 19(a) – 19(g) 
apply.  
 
Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. 
They are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve 
the delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, 
to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of 
showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access 
to classified information.9 Applicant met his burden of proof and persuasion. His 
financial situation continues to improve and I have no doubts as to his due diligence. 
 
 
                                                          
7 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
8 Compare, ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (despite the presence of unresolved debt, 
Board affirmed judge’s grant of a clearance because clear evidence of reform and rehabilitation), with, 
ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (applicant’s resolution of alleged financial issue (filed 
overdue tax returns) was insufficient to mitigate security concerns, because no extenuating 
circumstances to explain financial issue and no evidence of financial reform). 
 
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2016) (reasonable for judge to expect an applicant to present documentary evidence).  
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 An administrative judge must make a commonsense judgment about a person’s 
security clearance suitability after considering all available, reliable and relevant 
information. This is referred to as the whole-person concept.10 A judge’s assessment in 
these cases is informed by the guidelines, as well as the non-exclusive factors set forth 
in AG ¶¶ 2(d) and 2(f). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and highlight some 
additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military for many years and was honorably 
discharged. He has worked for his employer for many years. He previously held a 
security clearance. He has always been a reliable and trustworthy person according to 
his employers. Applicant is married and has three children. He provides for his family. 
He has the respect of his employers who are aware of his circumstances and his efforts 
to address his financial issues. He has never had a security violation and has guarded 
classified information for many years. The Government implied in the FORM that  while 
Applicant did not present documentation for each alleged debt on the SOR, with 
character references he could show himself through a whole-person analysis to be a 
trustworthy, reliable individual who will not jeopardize protected information. I have no 
questions or doubts about his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:         For Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________ 
Noreen Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 See generally AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
