 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-02608 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation and refusal to take a drug screen. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations and 
personal conduct guidelines. On November 29, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR 
(Answer) and requested a decision on the administrative (written) record.  
 
 On December 21, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant seven exhibits (Items 1 – 7) that the Government offers 
for admission into the record. Applicant received the FORM and accompanying exhibits 
on February 3, 2017 (Appellate Exhibit I). He was given 30 days to submit a response. 
He elected not to submit a response or offer any evidence in support of his case. He also 
did not object to the evidence submitted by the Government. Accordingly, without 
objection, Items 1 – 7 are admitted into the record.  
 
 
2 
 
 On October 1, 2017, after receiving confirmation that Applicant remained 
sponsored for a security clearance, I was assigned his case for decision. No additional 
matters were submitted by either party for inclusion in the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 32, is a disabled U.S. military veteran, having served in the military from 
2003 to 2009. His military service included an overseas assignment as part of a unit 
operating a missile defense system. He was first granted a security clearance while in the 
military. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems dating back to 2010, when he was evicted 
from his former apartment for failing to pay his rent. He was evicted from another 
apartment in 2014 for also failing to pay his rent. From 2010 to 2014, five judgments were 
issued against Applicant for past-due rent. These five judgments total about $4,000, and 
are referenced at SOR 1.a – 1.e. Applicant denies two of the judgments (1.b and 1.d), 
claiming they were settled and paid; but provided no documentation to substantiate his 
claims. As to the other three judgments (1.a, 1.c, and 1.e), Applicant has yet to take action 
to address them or failed to submit evidence documenting such action.  
 
 In addition to the five judgments, Applicant’s credit reports and SOR also reflect 
seven charged off or collection accounts totaling approximately $7,000. Applicant admits 
these SOR debts, except the $953 debt for past-due payments on his car referenced in 
1.h. He has yet to take action to address the six admitted (non-judgment) SOR debts and 
failed to submit evidence substantiating his claims regarding the car debt. 
 
 In approximately June 2015, Applicant refused to submit to a random drug screen 
at his former place of employment. He was advised by his former employer of the potential 
adverse consequences if he refused to submit to the drug screen. Instead of submitting 
to the drug screen, Applicant decided to quit. He explained in his Answer and during a 
May 2016 security clearance interview that he refused to submit to the drug screen as a 
matter of principle. He went on to state that he felt his former employer was targeting him 
and several others after another coworker was involved in a serious motor vehicle 
accident involving a company truck. He denies he was using any illicit drugs or 
substances at the time. 
 
 After refusing to take the drug screen, Applicant was out of work for about three 
months. He was then hired by his current employer, a large well-known company that 
regularly serves as a defense contractor. In October 2015, in connection with this new 
job, Applicant filled out and submitted a security clearance application. In explaining why 
he left his last job, Applicant stated: “to be closer to my family.”1 He was asked about this 
response during his May 2016 security clearance interview and reaffirmed his response 
to the investigator. After being confronted by the investigator with the information that the 
Office of Personnel Management had received from his former employer, Applicant 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1 at 17. 
 
3 
 
admitted that he left his former job under adverse circumstances, namely, his refusal to 
submit to a random drug screen.2  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards).3  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s misleading statements on his security clearance application and to the investigator were not 
alleged, and were only considered in assessing mitigation. See infra n. 4. 
 
3 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines that were in effect at 
the time the SOR was issued and my ultimate decision in this case would have been the same.  
 
4 
 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.4 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .5  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting classified information.6 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
                                                          
4 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Likewise, a judge can only use non-alleged conduct for specific 
limited purposes, such as, assessing mitigation and credibility, unless an applicant is placed on notice that 
such conduct also raises a security concern. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Even if I were to set aside the SOR debts that Applicant denies, the record 
evidence is sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) – 19(c). 
Applicant did not present any evidence showing that he has taken any action to address 
the delinquent debts he has incurred since 2010, including the three judgments 
referenced at SOR 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e. He also did not provide any information showing that 
he has received financial or debt counseling. In short, Applicant failed to show that his 
financial situation is under control. None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present evidence 
to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, to include 
the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they 
manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified 
information.7 Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion. His financial 
situation remains a security concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2016) (reasonable for judge to expect an applicant to present documentary evidence). Contrast with 
ISCR Case No. 15-05478 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017) (error for judge to accept applicant’s self-serving 
assertions that he had resolved financial issues without corroborating documentary evidence).  
 
6 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.8  
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I have considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline E, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information . . . that is not sufficient for an 
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when 
considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 Applicant’s refusal to submit to an employer-mandated drug screen raises serious 
questions about his suitability for a security clearance, as it calls into question his reliability 
and willingness to follow rules and regulations. His attempt to then mislead the 
Government about the circumstances that led him to leave the job undercuts the 
mitigating value of the passage of time since the incident occurred. The disqualifying 
condition listed at AG ¶16(c) applies. None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Additionally, Applicant’s failure to submit to a random drug screen is not minor in 
the security clearance context. Many persons, including all military members, agree to 
submit to such drug screens. Furthermore, a prerequisite for access to classified 
information and employment by large federal contractors, including Applicant’s current 
employer, is an agreement by their employees not to use illegal drugs and to submit to 
random drug screens to ensure compliance with that requirement.9 The misleading 
statement Applicant made in the security clearance application about the reason he left 
his last job – an application that he submitted through his employer after three months of 
unemployment – was not by accident or a mistake. It was a deliberate misstatement 
intended to secure a job. Applicant’s refusal to submit to a drug screen remains a security 
concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In making such 
assessments, an administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and the 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 15. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 16-00578 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2017) (judge may properly consider that large defense 
contractors, such as Applicant’s current employer, generally have a drug-free workplace policy). 
 
7 
 
whole-person concept.10 I hereby incorporate my above analysis and highlight some 
additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military and is a disabled veteran. He was first granted 
a security clearance while in the military. These factors raise favorable inferences 
regarding his eligibility for continued access to classified information. However, this 
favorable evidence is insufficient to mitigate the security concerns at issue. Applicant 
failed to submit any evidence showing that he has responsibly addressed his financial 
situation and taken control of his finances. His long history of failing to meet his lawful 
financial obligations raises unmitigated concerns about his ability to meet his security 
obligations. More importantly, Applicant’s failure to submit to an employer-mandated drug 
screen and the deliberate misstatements he made during the course of the security 
clearance process about the reason he left his former job raise serious questions about 
his suitability for a security clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information.11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:         Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 See generally AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
 
11 I considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C. See SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h).In light of 
the serious security concerns raised by the evidence, none of the exceptions are warranted.  
