 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03961 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant owes approximately $15,000 in unresolved 
delinquent debt. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 8, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 24, 2017. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on May 1, 2017, and did not respond. The documents appended to the FORM 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since August 
2014. He previously worked for federal contracting companies from June 2007 to 
November 2013. Applicant claims to have been granted a security clearance in the past, 
but the record does not corroborate this statement. He completed a security clearance 
application in November 2015, disclosing several delinquent accounts. The ensuing 
investigation revealed and the SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to five creditors 
for $15,000. Applicant blames his financial problems on a period of unemployment from 
November 2013 to July 2014, after he was fired from his job for having a violent 
outburst at work.  
 
 During his nine months of unemployment, Applicant fell behind on his financial 
obligations. When he finally found employment, Applicant had to move his family, at 
significant cost, to another state with a higher cost of living. Applicant admits owing the 
debts alleged in the SOR, but says that he cannot afford to pay them right now as he is 
playing catch up from his months of unemployment and the interstate move.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An 
individual who is financially overextended is at a greater risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.3  
 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in the record establish the 
Government’s prima facie case, that Applicant has an inability to pay his bills.4 Applicant 
failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the alleged concerns. The events 
causing Applicant’s financial problems were not beyond his control. He lost his job 
because he lost his temper and acted out violently. Furthermore, he did not provide 
evidence of any good-faith efforts to resolve his delinquent accounts. All the alleged 
debts remain unresolved and his financial problems are ongoing. Accordingly, the 
security concerns remain and none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions 
apply.  
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and 
persuasion to refute or mitigate the SOR allegations. He did not provide any evidence of 
debt repayment or that his finances are under control. Accordingly, his request for 
access to classified information is denied.  
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18. 
 
4 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts. 
 
4 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
