 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 16-01559 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence of resolution of his financial issues. 
Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 5, 2015, Applicant signed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 2. On September 1, 2016, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). The SOR 
set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Item 1. 
 
On September 28, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did 
not request a hearing. Item 1. On October 13, 2016, Department Counsel completed the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM). On October 25, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, 
and he did not respond to the FORM. On October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to me. 
 
2 
                                         
 
The case file consists of five exhibits. Items 1-5. Applicant did not object to any of the 
Government exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.l. Item 1. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information.   
 
Applicant is 57-year-old engineer.3 In 1981, he received a bachelor’s degree. He 
has not served in the military. In 1988, he married, and his children were born in 1990 
and 1993. There is no evidence of abuse of illegal drugs or violations of his employer’s 
rules. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges the following delinquent debts and tax issues: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a charged-off bank debt for $40,413. SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d 
allege three delinquent medical debts for $4,290, $1,286, and $446.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f allege tax liens filed in November 2012 for $15,000 and in 
March 2012 for $6,630. The SOR does not specify whether the tax liens were filed by 
federal or state governments.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j allege judgments filed in July 2015 for $2,965, in July 
2011 for $756, in February 2009 for $9,331; and in September 2008 for $2,245. SOR ¶ 
1.k alleges a telecommunications debt for $222. 
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at  http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s February 
5, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 
2. 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.l alleges Applicant failed to file his income tax return for at least tax year 
2010.4 During Applicant’s March 19, 2015 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
personal subject interview (PSI), he said that he did not file his federal and state tax 
returns for tax year 2010. He was unsure about whether he owed $15,000 in delinquent 
taxes for tax year 2009 or 2010. He believed the $15,000 was the combined debt for state 
and federal taxes. Applicant has also failed to file or pay taxes for other years to include 
2011. He cannot recall if he filed tax returns for tax years 2010, 2012 or 2013. Applicant 
did not list these other tax years on his SCA because he has no supporting documents 
establishing he filed or did not file those tax returns. He intends to file Federal and state 
tax returns for 2014.  
 
Applicant said in his SOR response: 
 
While I admit to the financial problems and issues I have had over the last 
few years, this in no way would jeopardize anything pertaining to my work 
decisions and daily effort. While I understand, because of the training I have 
had to date, that these issues put me at risk. I have always been an honest 
and trustworthy individual. The references I gave should have corroborated 
that fact. I have known these people for many years. 
 
These financial issues developed over time when for two years my salary 
was decreased by 15% and then in January of 2009 I was laid off. It took 
nine months to find a job again and that was a consulting job for less than I 
was making in 1998 dollars. 
 
I then entered the hospital with congestive heart failure (October 2014) and 
was out of work for another month without pay since I was out of work. Upon 
returning, my employer terminated my contract. I found another job in 
December of 2014 and have been there since. 
 
Upon being laid off in 2009, I have lived check to check since. I have not 
lived above my means since the only credit card I have is tied directly to my 
bank account as a debit card. I have not taken vacations or any other time 
off. 
 
Given all this[,] I have remained honest and loyal to my employers and the 
associates that I come in contact with on a daily basis.  
 
I do understand the importance of paying my bills and dealing [with] credit 
issues[.] [W]ithout any disposable income[,] paying bills is extremely 
difficult. My only asset is my house[,] and when that is paid off, I can, maybe, 
. . . persuade a bank to lend me money against my house[.] [Then I can] 
begin to pay off [these] bills.  
 
                                            
4 Unless stated otherwise the source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s March 19, 2015 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). Item 3.  
 
4 
                                         
 
My next steps are to work with IRS and lawyers to begin to get these issues 
resolved. Item 1. 
 
Applicant did not provide any additional information about resolution of any of the 
SOR allegations. He did not provide a timeline for when his home would be paid off or 
when he would begin to work with the IRS on his unfiled tax returns or to begin a payment 
plan to address his delinquent taxes.  
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel noted the absence of corroborating or 
supporting documentation of resolution of the SOR debts. FORM at 3-4. Aside from 
Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary evidence that Applicant 
paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the SOR debts. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. FORM at 4. He did 
not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
 
5 
                                         
 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
 
6 
                                         
 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes four disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG          
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability 
of mitigating conditions. 
 
  Seven financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,5 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
                                            
5 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;6  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply; however, Applicant presented some 
mitigating information. Applicant said his financial problems were the result of 
unemployment, illness, and reductions in income, and these circumstances were largely 
beyond his control. Applicant did not describe with sufficient specificity when these events 
                                            
6 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
occurred or their impact on the SOR debts. He did not describe receipt of credit 
counseling.   
 
Applicant did not provide documentation relating to his SOR debts such as: (1) 
proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a 
letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditor; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact;7 (3) copies 
of credible debt disputes sent to the creditor and/or credit reporting companies indicating 
he did not believe he was responsible for the debt and why he held such a belief; (4) 
evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or 
agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve this debt; or (5) other evidence of 
progress or resolution.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns. A willful 
failure to timely make (means complete and file with the IRS) a federal income tax return 
is a misdemeanor-level federal criminal offense.8 For purposes of this decision, I am not 
weighing Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal income tax returns against him as a 
federal crime. In regard to the failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns, 
the DOHA Appeal Board has commented: 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we 
have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is not directed at collecting 
debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By 
the same token, neither is it directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax 
returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment and reliability. Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her 
legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment 
                                            
7 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
8 Title 26 U.S.C, § 7203, willful failure to file return, supply information, or pay tax, reads:  
 
Any person . . . required by this title or by regulations made under authority thereof to make 
a return, keep any records, or supply any information, who willfully fails to . . .  make such 
return, keep such records, or supply such information, at the time or times required by law 
or regulations, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a 
misdemeanor . . . .  
 
A willful failure to make return, keep records, or supply information when required, is a misdemeanor without 
regard to existence of any tax liability. Spies v. United States, 317 U.S. 492 (1943); United States v. Walker, 
479 F.2d 407 (9th Cir. 1973); United States v. McCabe, 416 F.2d 957 (7th Cir. 1969); O’Brien v. United 
States, 51 F.2d 193 (7th Cir. 1931). 
 
9 
                                         
 
and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See 
Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 
183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) (emphasis in original). See ISCR 
Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 
(App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his SOR debts and filing his federal and state income tax 
returns. There is insufficient assurance that his financial problem is being resolved and 
will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 57-year-old engineer. In 1981, he received a bachelor’s degree. In 
1988, he married, and his children were born in 1990 and 1993. There is no evidence of 
abuse of illegal drugs or violations of his employer’s rules. 
 
The evidence against grant of a security clearance is more substantial. Applicant’s 
SOR lists two tax liens totaling $21,630, and nine delinquent debts totaling $61,954. Most 
importantly, he admitted during his OPM PSI that he failed to file or fully pay taxes for tax 
years 2009 or 2010 and 2011. He could not remember whether he filed his federal and 
state tax returns for tax years 2012 or 2013. He provided insufficient corroborating or 
substantiating documentary evidence of payments and an established payment plan or 
 
10 
                                         
 
other mitigating information relating to his SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
documented information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or financial 
progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts and tax issues, as well as a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, 
he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial 
consideration security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
