 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02526 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
October 13, 2017 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. She failed to timely pay quarterly Federal business taxes, 
medical debts, and consumer debts. National security eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant submitted her Answer to the SOR on October 29, 2016, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 18, 2016. 
Applicant received it on December 8, 2016. The Government’s evidence is identified as 
Items 1 through 4. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to 
the FORM, did not file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to 
respond beyond the 30-day period she was afforded. Items 1 through 4 are admitted into 
the record. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG promulgated in SEAD 
4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a through 1.d, with explanations. Applicant 
failed to specifically admit or deny SOR allegations 1.e through 1.l. She noted SOR 
allegation 1.e was a duplicate of allegation 1.c. She noted SOR allegations 1.f through 1.l 
had been resolved. In the absence of clear admissions, SOR allegations 1.e through 1.l 
will be treated as denials. (Item 2.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She is divorced and has one adult son. She is a high 
school graduate. She has worked for the same company since 1994. She also worked as 
a cashier at a gas station from June 2012 to July 2015. Additionally, she is a partner in a 
business. She attributed her financial delinquencies to a business downturn. (Item 2; Item 
3.) 
 
SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b relate to the same Federal tax debt, which Applicant 
reported on her February 1, 2016 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP). (Item 3.) In response to questions about her financial record, she disclosed that 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had filed a “$50,000” tax lien against her personal 
property “because her business got behind on pay roll taxes.” (Item 3.) Item 4, a credit 
report dated February 17, 2016, reflects a Federal tax lien in the amount of $20,548 was 
filed against Applicant in April 2014 and was “unreleased.” (Item 4 at 3.) Applicant 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
 
explained on her e-QIP that her elderly mother handled the company’s books and 
Applicant was unaware that the payroll taxes were not being paid every quarter. On her 
e-QIP, Applicant claimed to have a payment agreement with the IRS to remit $300 
monthly on this debt. She indicated she was current on her payments in her Answer. 
However, she produced no documentation on the current status of this tax obligation, a 
repayment agreement with the IRS, or proof of payments toward the debt, other than her 
statements. This debt is unresolved. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
Additionally, Applicant’s credit report, dated February 17, 2016, reflects nine other 
delinquent accounts totaling $6,046, as alleged in SOR allegations 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f 
through 1.l.2 (Item 4 at 3, 16, 17.) They were reported delinquent between 2014 and 2016. 
(Item 4.) While Applicant averred in her Answer that she was either paying or had paid 
allegations 1.c, and 1.f through 1.l, she failed to submit proof to substantiate her claim. 
She further indicated that allegation 1.d had been “charged off on [her] credit.” (Item 2.) 
SOR allegations 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f through 1.l remain unresolved. 
 
Applicant did not document any financial counseling or provide budget information 
from which to predict her future solvency. She offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning her character or trustworthiness, the quality of her professional performance, 
the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect to handling 
sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate 
her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case 
decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
                                                          
2 SOR allegation 1.e refers to the collection account that formed the basis for the judgment debt in allegation 
1.c. Allegation 1.e will be found for Applicant to avoid counting it twice. 
 
4 
 
 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant’s business failed to timely pay Federal payroll taxes, as required. As a 
result, a tax lien was filed against her. She also incurred nine other delinquent medical 
and consumer debts totaling $6,046, which appear to remain unresolved despite her 
claims of payment. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay Federal payroll taxes for an undisclosed period of 
time. As a result, a $20,548 Federal tax lien was filed against her in 2014. She failed to 
document proof of payments to the IRS. Additionally, she has nine other delinquent 
accounts that remain unresolved. Her debt is ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began after she suffered a business downturn. That 
is a circumstance beyond her control. However, the record lacks documentation to show 
she reasonably and responsibly addressed her delinquencies.  Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b) is not established.  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation of financial counseling. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that she is making a good-faith effort to repay her creditors because 
she did not provide credible evidence of payments on her Federal tax lien, medical debts, 
and consumer debts. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 
20(d).  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence of a reasonable basis to dispute any of her 
alleged delinquencies. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of arrangements with the IRS to resolve her 
Federal tax debt, other than her statements to that effect. Documentation of compliance 
with those arrangements is necessary. AG ¶ 20(g) does not fully mitigate the 
Government’s concern. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 47 years old. She 
 
7 
 
 
has been employed steadily since 1994. During an unspecified time period, Applicant’s 
business experienced a downturn. She subsequently failed to pay Federal payroll taxes 
and a tax lien was filed against her. She also incurred numerous unresolved medical and 
consumer debts. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence about her overall financial 
stability to conclude further tax problems or financial delinquencies are unlikely. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
