 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03442 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed to his 
financial problems and that he was financially responsible under the circumstances. He 
disclosed his financial problems in his 2015 security clearance application (SCA). His 
financial problems are being resolved. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a SCA on January 20, 2015. After reviewing it and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) on December 23, 2016, issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on January 24, 2017, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu 
of a hearing.  
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
February 10, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on March 8, 2017. He was allowed 30 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, 
and mitigate the concerns. Applicant timely responded to the FORM with a statement, a 
 
2 
 
 
copy of his answer to the SOR, and a 2017 combined credit report, which are now part 
of the record. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the 13 SOR allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.m). His 
admissions to the SOR and in his response to the FORM are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a large federal contractor. He has been 
married three times and divorced twice. His first marriage ended after five years in 
1997. He married his second wife in 1998 and divorced in 2005. He married his current 
wife in September 2005. He has four children of these marriages, ages 9, 12, 17, and 
23, and two stepchildren ages 15 and 24. Applicant completed his bachelor’s degree in 
2002.  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force as an enlisted airman between December 
1993 and February 2003. He was honorably discharged, and then commissioned as an 
Air Force officer. He served as an officer from February 2003 to December 2013. He 
was honorably retired with the rank of captain (O-3). While in the Air Force, Applicant 
possessed a secret clearance. There is no evidence that his clearance was ever 
suspended or that there were any issues of concern.  
 
Shortly after Applicant’s retirement, his current employer, a federal contractor, 
hired him as a systems administrator. Applicant disclosed in his January 2015 SCA his 
financial problems, which included 18 delinquent accounts, some of which are alleged in 
the SOR. He explained that his financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond 
his control. In October 2008, his daughter was born with a genetic defect that required a 
prolonged stay at the hospital, multiple procedures, and a couple of surgeries. In March 
2009, his wife’s mother was diagnosed with ALS, and after some treatments, she 
passed away in October 2009. Applicant assumed the cost of her burial expenses. In 
March 2010, his father-in-law was diagnosed with lung cancer, and after some medical 
treatment, he passed away in June 2011. Applicant took an Air Force Aid loan to pay for 
the family travel, lodging, and burial expenses. In November 2010, Applicant’s father 
was diagnosed with ALS, and he passed away in March 2012. Again, Applicant 
assumed some of the burial expenses. 
 
Applicant explained that he incurred numerous medical expenses, travel and 
lodging expenses for him and his family to visit and care for sick family members during 
extended periods, and he paid for their burial expenses. All these factors placed an 
extreme financial hardship on him. He used his credit and took loans to pay for these 
extraordinary expenses.  
 
After the death of his father in March 2012, Applicant retained the services of a 
debt consolidation company to help him repay his debts. He stated that he made 
 
3 
 
 
monthly payments of $1,008, until April 2013, when the Air Force notified him he was 
not selected for promotion and would be pending mandatory retirement in December 
2013. He stopped making payments on his repayment plan. After his current employer 
hired him, he relocated to another state where the higher cost of living and his reduced 
income from his civilian job prevented him from continuing his debt consolidation 
program. Applicant continued to work with various creditors on his own to repay his 
debts. 
 
The file has evidence showing that Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. The 2015 credit report shows Applicant disputed 10 accounts and later 
went on to settle and pay 7 of the disputed accounts. (GE 4) The 2016 credit report 
shows Applicant disputed 5 accounts and later settled and paid 1 of the disputed 
accounts. He also paid five accounts, for less than what he owed, after they were 
charged off. (GE 5) Applicant’s 2017 credit report shows 15 open accounts in good 
standing. In the “closed accounts section,” the 2017 credit report shows 32 accounts in 
good standing, five of which were paid and moved from the negative category to the 
good standing category, and he had 13 negative accounts remaining.  
 
When Applicant submitted his 2015 SCA he disclosed 18 accounts delinquent. 
As of the March 2017, he had paid or resolved 9 delinquent accounts, and had 10 
delinquent accounts remaining. He acknowledged that he still had too many delinquent 
accounts, but believed that his actions so far showed a good faith effort to meet and 
fulfill his financial obligations. 
 
The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted to 13 delinquent accounts. Concerning 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.m, Applicant stated he tried to contact the 
creditors, but the accounts had been sold to collectors. He could not identify the legal 
owner of some of the delinquent accounts. He attempted to correspond with some of 
the collectors without results.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent medical account for ambulatory service provided 
to Applicant’s daughter. Applicant explained the insurance did not pay the account 
because the creditor submitted the wrong account number. He resubmitted the claim to 
the insurance company with the correct account number and he expects it to be paid.  
 
Applicant settled the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. His 2017 credit 
report shows the accounts have a “0” balance. Also, the SOR alleged the same 
delinquent account in both SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k. Applicant also settled the account in 
SOR ¶ 1.l. 
 
Applicant has learned his lesson the hard way. Leaving the military was a difficult 
transition for him that forced him to move to another state with a higher cost of living 
and lower income from his new job. He believes circumstances beyond his control 
contributed to his financial problems. He noted his military service while possessing a 
clearance without any security incidents. He hopes that his actions to pay his delinquent 
debs would show that he is working hard to reestablish his credit worthiness, reliability, 
 
4 
 
 
and good judgment. Applicant also noted that he has not missed a financial payment in 
over three years, while at the same time, he has been reducing the number of 
delinquent accounts. Applicant promised to continue paying his legal debts and to 
resolve his financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
 
5 
 
 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. Between 
October 2008 and March 2012, Applicant acquired debts beyond his financial means, 
many of which remain delinquent. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to 
satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record 
established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and recent. However, his financial 
problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, circumstances beyond his 
control – the birth of his disabled daughter in 2008, the terminal illness and death of 
three immediate family members between 2009 and 2012, his mandatory retirement 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
from the Air Force in 2013, the move to a higher cost-of-living state, and his reduced 
earnings. Considering the evidence as a whole, it shows that his financial problems 
occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur.  
 
 The analysis of whether Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances 
would have been easier if Applicant had submitted documentary evidence of his efforts 
to remain in contact with his creditors, participation in debt-consolidation programs, 
payments made, payment arrangements established, and the legal basis for the dispute 
of some of his debts. Notwithstanding, the file has substantial evidence to show that 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances.  The credit reports in evidence 
show numerous accounts paid and in good standing. They also show Applicant 
disputed some accounts, that he paid some accounts after they were disputed, and that 
he paid accounts after they were charged off. These transactions are clear evidence 
that Applicant remained in contact with his creditors, took efforts to resolve his financial 
problems, and paid many of his delinquent financial obligations. Applicant’s actions are 
evidence of his responsible efforts to resolve his financial situation. 
 
 In sum, Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish that circumstances beyond 
his control caused the financial hardship and prevented him from paying the debts. He 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. He disclosed his financial problems in his 
2015 SCA. He is paying his delinquent debts and his current financial situation is 
improving. I find that there are clear indications that his financial problem is being 
resolved or is under control. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He retired from the 
Air Force after 20 years of honorable service. During his service, he held a clearance 
and there is no evidence of any issues of security concern. He presented sufficient 
information to show that circumstances beyond his control contributed to or aggravated 
his financial problems. He presented sufficient information to establish that he was 
financially responsible under the circumstances and that his financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. The financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
8 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
