 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01238 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision on Remand 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 30, 
2015. On June 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 16, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on August 25, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on August 
31, 2016, but did not respond. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2017.  
 
 On July 14, 2017, I issued a decision denying Applicant’s application to continue 
his security clearance. I found against him regarding two unsatisfied judgments for 
homeowners’ association fees, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. I also found against him 
regarding a delinquent medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. I found in his favor on a 
credit-card debt on an account for which he was an authorized user, alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.d. My findings regarding SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are not affected by the remand.  
 
In Applicant’s answer to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, he stated that he had a payment 
agreement for the two judgments, and that the agreement was attached to his answer. I 
pointed out in my decision that no agreement was attached. Department Counsel 
pointed out the absence of documentation in the FORM, but Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM, and did not avail himself of that opportunity to submit the missing 
documentation. 
 
 Applicant appealed my adverse decision, and he attached copies of a payment 
agreement to his appeal brief, claiming that the agreement was attached to his answer 
to the SOR when he submitted it. The Appeal Board remanded the case and directed 
that I “reopen the record and collect from the parties and consider as appropriate the 
documents which Applicant claims to have submitted.”  
 
To implement the Appeal Board’s decision, I issued an order on October 2, 2017, 
directing Applicant to “send me a copy of the documents that he claims to have 
attached to his answer to the Statement of Reasons, along with any comments or 
argument he considers appropriate.” The order gave him a deadline of October 18, 
2017, for submitting the documents and gave Department Counsel 15 days after receipt 
of the documents to submit comments or argument regarding the documents. The order 
is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. 
 
On October 3, 2017, Applicant submitted a packet of documents, including an 
unsigned copy of a payment agreement with the homeowners’ association dated 
January 12, 2015. Department Counsel did not object to his submission and did not 
submit any argument concerning it. The payment agreement is admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AX) A. The documents accompanying AX A are attached to the record as HX II. 
Department Counsel’s response to Applicant’s submission is attached as HX III. Based 
on AX A, I have made additional findings of fact and reconsidered the applicability of the 
mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(d) (“the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”). 
 
 
 3
Findings of Fact 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in September 2015, he disclosed a 
delinquent debt for about $6,000 for homeowners’ association dues. He stated that the 
issue arose in January 2009, and that he was resolving the debt through a payment 
plan providing for payments of $150 per month, plus the regular monthly dues payment 
of $68. (Item 5 at 29.) His credit report from October 2015 reflected a judgment filed 
against him in July 2012 for $4,883 and a second judgment filed against him in June 
2014 for $2,770. (Item 7 at 5.) During a personal subject interview (PSI) in January 
2016, he told an investigator that he began falling behind on his homeowners’ 
association dues in January 2009 because he had unexpected bills for his car and his 
wife was not working. He told the investigator he began making monthly $150 payments 
on the debt in February 2015, in addition to the monthly dues payment of $68.  
 
 When Applicant responded to the SOR, his responses to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b 
were handwritten on a copy of the SOR, and he wrote, “See payment plan attached (I 
admit).” No payment plan was attached. In response to my order implementing the 
remand, Applicant submitted AX A and stated that it is the document that he submitted 
with his answer to the SOR.  
 
 AX A is a letter dated January 12, 2015, from the law firm representing the 
homeowners’ association. The letter recites that the board of directors of the association 
had reviewed Applicant’s “fee waiver payment plan request” submitted on December 
12, 2014, and had denied it. However, the board of directors offered to waive late fees 
and interest in the amount of $1,723 and accept a payment plan providing for monthly 
payments of at least $150, in addition to the regular monthly assessments. The letter 
informed Applicant that the balance on his account, as of the date of the letter, was 
$8,985.24. The proposed payment plan included a payment schedule providing for $150 
payments beginning on February 1, 2015, and ending with a payment of $135.24 on 
January 1, 2020. The proposed payment plan provided that a default on the regular 
monthly assessment or the installment plan will result in resumption of the collection 
action without further notice. The plan required Applicant to complete a financial 
questionnaire. The offer of a payment plan is signed by the attorney for the 
homeowners’ association, but the copy submitted by Applicant does not bear his 
signature or his spouse’s signifying acceptance of the offer. The packet of documents 
submitted by Applicant did not include a copy of the financial questionnaire or any 
documentary evidence of payments under the plan. 
 
Analysis 
 
 Based on Applicant’s representations, I have concluded that AX A probably was 
attached to his answer to the SOR. Based on Department Counsel’s comments about 
the lack of documentation, I have concluded that AX A probably was not attached to 
Applicant’s answer when Department Counsel reviewed the file.  
 
 
 4
 I adhere to my analysis of the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions in 
my original decision, except for the analysis of AG ¶ 20(d), which is modified in light of 
the additional evidence in the record. In his SCA and the PSI, Applicant claimed that his 
inability to pay monthly dues began around January 2009, due to unexpected car 
expenses. The balance due as of January 2015, as recited in AX A, is the equivalent of 
at least eight years of nonpayment. While unexpected car expenses may have justified 
a few months of nonpayment, Applicant has offered no plausible and credible 
explanation for continued nonpayment. He has not established a good-faith effort to 
resolve the debt. He did not request a waiver of the delinquent dues until December 
2014, six months after the second judgment was entered against him and more than 
two years after the first judgment was entered against him.  
 
For the purposes of this decision on remand, I have assumed that Applicant 
signed the offer of a payment agreement and that the copy submitted as AX A is his 
unsigned file copy of the original. However, he has submitted no evidence of any 
payments under the agreement. He has been repeatedly reminded of the need for 
documentary evidence. While Applicant receives some credit for initiating an effort to 
resolve the debts, his failure to submit documentation of any payments, in spite of 
repeated reminders of the need for documentary evidence, precludes a finding that he 
is “adhering to a good-faith effort” to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. It 
is reasonable for an administrative judge to expect an applicant to present documentary 
evidence showing resolution of specific debts. See ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). “Once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 8, 2011), citing Dorfmont v. 
Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). 
 
Findings and Conclusion 
 
I adhere to my previous findings against Applicant regarding the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, and I adhere to my previous finding for him regarding the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d. I adhere to my conclusion that it is not clearly consistent with 
the national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access 
to classified information, I adhere to my previous decision to deny his application for a 
security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
