 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02629 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John V. Berry, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 3, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 23, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for July 19, 2017.  
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government’s administrative notice 
request, discovery letter, and exhibit list were appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) 1 through 3. Government’s Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant’s administrative notice request was appended to the record 
as HE A. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through N, which were admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 27, 2017.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d and 
admitted in part, and denied in part, the SOR allegation in subparagraph 1.e.2 Applicant 
is a 50-year-old quality assurance manager employed by a defense contractor since 
January 2016. She worked for another defense contractor from January 2015 to 
January 2016, during which time she was granted eligibility for a public trust position in 
March 2015. She has never held a DOD security clearance.3  
 
Applicant was born in India. She obtained a bachelor’s degree from an Indian 
university in 1987 and a diploma in business management from an Indian college in 
1991. She immigrated to the United States in 2001. She was naturalized as a U.S. 
citizen and obtained a U.S. passport in 2010. She is married and has one adult child. 
Her husband and child are naturalized U.S. citizens residing in the United States. 
Applicant and her husband have owned their current home in the United States since 
2013.4 
 
 Applicant’s mother, brother, and two sisters are Indian citizens residing in India. 
Applicant’s mother is 76 years old. She is in poor health and lives with Applicant’s elder 
sister. Applicant’s mother is a homemaker and has never been affiliated with the Indian 
government or military. She supports herself through a pension from investments 
Applicant’s grandfather made when he was alive and worked as a tax consultant. 
Applicant does not provide her mother with financial support. Applicant last saw her 
mother when she visited India in 2014. She also saw her mother during trips to India in 
2007, 2010, and 2011. Through Applicant’s sponsorship, her mother also visited 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s response to the SOR.  
 
3 Tr. at 18-73, 92-115; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1; AEs A-C, G-H. Applicant, her husband, and their child have used their U.S. 
passports for foreign travel since becoming naturalized U.S. citizens. While they use their Indian 
identification cards along with their U.S. passports when they travel to India, they are not Indian citizens 
and do not hold Indian passports. Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1; AEs A-C. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant in the United States in 2007 and 2014. Applicant talks to her weekly. She is 
not aware Applicant is seeking a security clearance.5 
 
 Applicant’s brother is 48 years old. He works as a senior business development 
manager for a private company. He has no affiliations with the Indian government or 
military. Applicant talks to him once every three to six months, primarily about their 
mother’s health. He is not aware Applicant is seeking a security clearance.6  
 
 Applicant’s elder sister is 52 years old. As of January 2016, she worked for a life 
insurance company. Her husband is retired from music recording. Their adult child 
works in a pharmacy. None of them are affiliated with the Indian government or military. 
Applicant talks to her elder sister weekly, primarily about their mother’s health. 
Applicant’s elder sister, husband, and child are not aware Applicant is seeking a 
security clearance.7 
  
 Applicant’s younger sister is 46 years old and divorced. She works as a 
secretary. She is not affiliated with the Indian government or military. Applicant has a 
distant relationship with this sister, and exchanges greetings with her primarily during 
festive occasions.8 
 
 Applicant and her husband purchased an apartment in India in 1996 after they 
married. They purchased it for $11,000 USD. The value as of the hearing was 
approximately $40,000 USD. They wanted to sell this apartment when they moved to 
the United States, but when Applicant’s mother-in-law died in 2002 the apartment 
became her father-in-law’s primary residence. Since his passing in 2016, the apartment 
has been vacant. Applicant’s elder sister maintains it by occasionally checking on it. 
Applicant and her husband intend to sell this apartment. They have not yet sold it 
because they need to be in India to do so. They anticipate selling it when they visit India 
in the summer of 2018.9  
   
 In 2010, Applicant and her husband purchased an apartment in the same 
building in which her brother and sister own apartments. They purchased this apartment 
for $40,000 USD, and the value as of the hearing was approximately $50,000 USD. 
Their intention in purchasing this apartment was for Applicant’s mother to move into it, 
as the local municipality had declared the building in which she then lived as unfit. Due 
to health issues, her mother instead moved in with Applicant’s elder sister. Since they 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1; AEs D, E. 
 
 
4 
 
purchased it, the apartment has been vacant. Applicant and her husband intend to sell it 
in the future.10  
 
 In 2007, Applicant and her husband opened a bank account with a U.S. bank that 
also operated in India, allowing them to remit money to Applicant’s mother and father-in-
law in India in case of medical emergency. They reported this bank account in their 
relevant U.S. tax returns. They closed this bank account in November 2016, upon 
Applicant’s receipt of the SOR. In doing so, they transferred the balance of 
approximately $30,000 USD to Applicant’s mother. Neither Applicant nor her husband 
have any other foreign bank accounts.11 
 
 Applicant has reported all of her foreign trips to her security office. She stated 
that she would immediately report any approach by a foreign contact. She takes her 
allegiance to the United States very seriously. She, her husband, and her son are 
engrained into the social fabric in the United States. The majority of their social contacts 
and friends are in the United States. Applicant and her husband are heavily invested in 
the United States and plan on retiring here. In addition to the home in which they have 
lived since 2013, Applicant and her husband continue to own and rent out the first home 
they purchased in 2004. They also have substantial retirement assets in the United 
States. Their combined assets in the United States total $1.2 million. Other than their 
two properties in India, which have a combined value of $90,000 USD, Applicant and 
her husband do not have any other financial interests in India. Her supervisor testified 
that Applicant is a hard worker and displays good ethical behavior. Her coworker 
testified that Applicant has great integrity. Her character references describe her as a 
trustworthy individual.12  
 
India 
 
 The Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive in its 2009 to 2011 
report to Congress stated that the intelligence services, private sector, and citizens of 
dozens of countries, including U.S. allies and partners, target sensitive U.S. economic 
information and technology. It identified in its 2008 annual report to Congress on 
foreign economic collection and industrial espionage, India and seven other countries 
as being involved in economic and industrial espionage. An earlier version of the report 
named India as among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information. The most heavily targeted sectors include aeronautics, information 
systems, lasers and optics, sensors, and marine systems. The information and 
communications technology sector will likely remain one of the highest priorities of 
foreign collectors, and foreign entities are expected to continue their efforts to collect 
information on the full array of military technologies in use or under development. 
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1; AE F. 
 
11 Tr. at 18-74, 92-115; GE 1; AEs J, L, N. 
 
12 Tr. at 77-115; GE 1; AEs G, H, I, K, M. 
 
 
5 
 
 The U.S. Department of Justice has identified numerous recent criminal cases 
concerning export enforcement related to proprietary defense information, economic 
espionage, theft of trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving 
both the government of India and private companies and individuals in India. Illegal 
technology transfers, even to private Indian entities, are a significant concern because 
foreign government entities have learned to capitalize on private-sector technology 
acquisitions.  
 
 Anti-Western terrorist groups, including some on the U.S. Government’s list of 
foreign terrorist organizations, are active in India. Throughout 2015, India continued to 
experience terrorist attacks, including operations launched by terrorist groups based in 
Pakistan. In its March 2017 worldwide travel caution, the U.S. Department of State 
continued to warn U.S. citizens that India continues to experience terrorist and 
insurgent activities that may affect U.S. citizens directly or indirectly. 
 
 India also continues to experience significant human rights abuses. The U.S. 
Department of State reported in March 2017 that India’s most significant human rights 
problems were police and security forces abuses, including extrajudicial killings, 
torture, and rape; corruption which remained widespread and contributed to ineffective 
responses to crime, including those against women and children; and societal violence 
based on gender, religious affiliation, and caste or tribe. Other human rights problems 
included disappearances, hazardous prison conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention, 
and lengthy pretrial detention. Rape, domestic violence, dowry-related deaths, honor 
killings, sexual harassment, and discrimination against women and girls remain serious 
problems. Crimes against women are common. Contributing to these abuses is a lack 
of accountability for misconduct at all levels of government, resulting in a culture of 
widespread impunity. 
    
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant closed the account she and her husband opened in 2007 with a U.S. 
bank that also operated in India. However, her family and two properties in India create 
a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(f) have 
been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
 
8 
 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant maintains contact with her family in India. Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 
8(c) are not established for the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and 7(b).  
 
Applicant, her husband, and her son have made the United States their home 
since they immigrated here in 2001. They are naturalized U.S. citizens and have used 
their U.S. passports to travel to India. While Applicant and her husband have two 
properties in India, they are more heavily and significantly invested in the United States. 
They intend to retire in the United States. Applicant met her burden to demonstrate that 
she would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest and that her two 
properties in India are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure her. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(f) are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
