 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00325 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 1, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
submitted on July 28, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the 
FORM on September 13, 2016. He did not respond to the Government’s FORM. The 
Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted in evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old driver and technician employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2015. He obtained a high-school diploma in 1991 and 
attended college in 2014, but did not earn a degree. He served honorably in the U.S. 
military from March 1993 until he retired in September 2013. He was first granted a 
DOD security clearance in 1993. He was previously married from 1993 to 1998, and he 
has one adult child.2     
 
 The SOR alleges 10 delinquent debts, totaling $38,858. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.d, and 1.f.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to two periods of unemployment. The 
first period occurred from September 2013 to September 2014, after he retired from the 
U.S. military and was unable to find a job. The second period occurred from November 
2014 to February 2015, when the contract for his prior job ended. He supported himself 
with military retirement benefits during both periods of unemployment; he did not 
receive unemployment benefits.4  
 
 Applicant listed SOR ¶ 1.a in his March 2015 security clearance application. He 
discussed SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.g during his April 2015 background interview. Credit reports 
from April 2015 and May 2016 also verify his delinquent debts.5  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a is for a car Applicant purchased in 2011. As of April 2015, it had been 
one year since he made a payment, he was in the process of refinancing the account, 
and he expected to have it refinanced by May 2015, at which time he would begin 
making payments. His April 2015 credit report listed this debt as in collection for 
$25,327. His May 2016 credit report listed this debt as $1,066 past due, with a 
scheduled payment of $385, and a total balance of $25,076.6  
 
                                                          
2 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Items 1-3. 
 
5 Items 2-5. 
 
6 Items 3-5. 
 
3 
 
 As of April 2015, Applicant was unaware of SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. He intended to 
look into and pay them if he determined they were his debts.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e is for two personal loans Applicant obtained in 2007 and 2010, to 
assist with paying his rent and bills. As of April 2015, he was attempting to work out 
settlement payments, and he expected to pay the debt by the end of summer 2015.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f is for a car Applicant cosigned for an ex-girlfriend in 2012. He began 
receiving calls from the creditor for payment after they broke up in April 2014. He 
ignored the calls because he could not afford to make any payments, and he could not 
force his ex-girlfriend to make any payments. He assumed the car was repossessed. He 
has since learned not to cosign for anyone.9 
 
 Applicant believes SOR ¶ 1.g is for an internet account in his name that he forgot 
to cancel. As of April 2015, he intended to look into and set up a payment plan if he 
determined the debt was his.10 
 
 Applicant indicated during his April 2015 interview that his finances had gotten 
better since he obtained his current job. He had been able to budget properly for the 
first time since retiring from the U.S. military. He had been living rent free with a friend 
since February 2015, which was helpful for his finances. He was in the process of 
reaching out to his creditors to attempt to settle his debts. He did not believe his 
financial issues would recur. Applicant failed to provide documentary evidence of any 
actions he may have taken to resolve the SOR debts.11  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
7 Item 3. 
 
8 Item 3. 
 
9 Item 3. 
 
10 Item 3. 
 
11 Items 1-5. 
 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
5 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has ten delinquent debts totaling $38,858. He admitted all of the debts 
with the exception of SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f. The debts are verified by his credit 
reports. While the May 2016 credit report no longer listed SOR ¶ 1.a as being in 
collection status, it was reported as past due in the amount of $1,066 with a balance of 
$25,076. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment are conditions beyond Applicant’s control 
that contributed to his financial problems. However, Applicant has not shown that he 
acted responsibly under his circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. Applicant 
indicated that he intended to look into SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g to determine 
if these debts belonged to him, and to pay them if they did. Applicant has not provided 
documentation to show that he has taken action to resolve his delinquent debts. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and 
they continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. His financial problems are not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) do not 
apply. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant served honorably in the U.S. military from March 1993 until he retired in 
September 2013. He was first granted a DOD security clearance in 1993. 
 
However, Applicant’s financial delinquencies remain unresolved. His finances 
remain a security concern. He failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
