 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00980 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement and substance misuse. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse. The DOD CAF 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AGs implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered 
this case under the old AGs implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AGs.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 2, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-4 (Item 1 included pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on 
December 17, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not file any objections nor 
submit any additional evidence. Items 2-4 are admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted the allegations in the SOR. I adopt these 
admissions as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He is single and has one child, age 10. He has worked 
for his current employer, a defense contractor, since May 2010. He is a high school 
graduate.2   
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency, in July 2008, 
and from approximately October 2015 to approximately January 2016. Applicant told a 
defense investigator in August 2010 that he experimented with marijuana in July 2008 
by using it on two or three occasions. He further stated to an investigator that in 
November 2009, he began experiencing pain in his stomach and back and was 
diagnosed with Berger’s Disease (a type of kidney disease). His doctors prescribed him 
opiate-based medicine. He did not want to take this medicine for fear of addiction, so he 
was advised to seek a medical marijuana card in the state where he resided. He claims 
he received a medical marijuana card and used marijuana from April to July 2010 to 
relieve his pain. He did not provide a copy of his marijuana card. He told the investigator 
he stopped using marijuana in July 2010 because he was not experiencing pain. He 
indicated he would use marijuana in the future if the pain returned.3 
 
 In October 2015, in preparation for an overseas deployment by his employer, 
Applicant was notified that he was required to submit to a urinalysis test. Upon this 
notification, Applicant submitted documentation to his security officer indicating that he 
was a registered marijuana user in his state of residence. Applicant submitted to the 
urinalysis test, which came back positive for marijuana metabolites.4 
                                                          
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admits using marijuana multiple times from October 2015 until his last 
use in January 2016. He claims that he used it only for pain purposes. He also claims 
that he does not plan to use marijuana in the future.5 
 
 Applicant did not produce any good character evidence. Since he submitted this 
case for an administrative determination, I was not able to judge his credibility.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
5 Item 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement and 
substance misuse:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable in this case include: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; and 
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions in 2008, and between 2015 and 
2016. He tested positive for marijuana on an employer-mandated urinalysis test in 
October 2015. I find that both the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
potentially apply in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
  
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
 (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
 involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
 involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
 eligibility. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana was frequent and given his long-term pattern of use, 
his claimed abstinence beginning in 2016, is not sufficiently attenuated to be considered 
remote. He states he will not use in the future, but he does not address how he intends 
to treat the pain he experiences, for which he has always used marijuana to curb. He 
did not provide a signed statement of intent abstaining from all future illegal drug use, 
which acknowledged any future misuse would be grounds for revocation of his security 
clearance. Applicant’s claimed abstention is insufficient to convince me that recurrence 
is unlikely. His frequency of past use casts doubt upon his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.         
 
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that he used marijuana 
on numerous occasions and he tested positive for marijuana before an overseas 
deployment for his employer.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement and substance misuse.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs  1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
