 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-01106 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Available information is sufficient to overcome the security concerns raised by 
the Government’s adverse information about her financial problems and personal 
conduct. Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 2, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for her job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
On July 29, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).2 At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF 
applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new 
set of AGs, effective for all security clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 
8, 2017. I have based my decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On October 13, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November 1, 2016, and had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant did not provide any 
additional information in response to the FORM. I received the case on October 1, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $51,848 for nine 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.d, 1.f – 1.h, 1.j, 1.k). The debts at SOR 1.g 
and 1.h represent unpaid federal and state taxes, respectively, totaling $49,958. Those 
debts are for the 2007, 2008, and 2009 tax years, and represent 96 percent of the total 
debt at issue. The Government also alleged that Applicant filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition in 2011 that was converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2012, 
and dismissed in September 2012 (SOR 1.e); and that Applicant’s mortgage was 
foreclosed in 2010 (SOR 1.i). Applicant denied SOR 1.d, 1.f and 1.k. She admitted the 
remaining Guideline F allegations, with explanations and supporting documents. 
(FORM, Items 1 and 2) 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified 
answers to e-QIP Section 26 (Financial Record) by failing to disclose the bankruptcy 
action discussed in SOR 1.e (SOR 2.a); by failing to list the tax debts alleged in SOR 
1.g and 1.h (SOR 2.b); by failing to list the unpaid federal taxes alleged at SOR 1.g as a 
delinquent federal debt (SOR 2.c); and by failing to list the delinquent debts alleged at 
SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f – 1.i, and 1.k (SOR 2.d). The Government also alleged that 
Applicant deliberately made false statements to a DOD investigator during a subject 
interview on September 22, 2015, when Applicant affirmed the negative answers about 
her finances in her e-QIP (SOR 2.e). Applicant admitted providing incorrect answers in 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on nine enclosed exhibits 
(Items 1 - 9). 
5 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
her e-QIP but denied any intent to provide false or misleading information. (FORM, 
Items 1 and 2) In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I find the 
following relevant facts. 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old single mother of a teenage daughter. She has been 
employed by a defense contractor since March 2015. She has a good reputation in the 
workplace for hard work and professionalism. (FORM, Items 2 and 3) 
 
 Applicant was married from August 2001 until divorcing her ex-husband in June 
2016. The couple separated in September 2014. Applicant’s ex-husband abuse of 
illegal drugs caused their marital finances to suffer. In July 2015, her ex-husband was 
ordered to pay monthly child support of $937. A personal financial statement provided 
by Applicant in March 2016 does not show that she has been receiving those payments. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant and her ex-husband lost a house to foreclosure. Applicant 
provided information showing there is no continuing obligation after the account was 
closed seven years ago. In May 2011, they filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection 
but could not agree on a wage earner’s repayment plan they could afford. The petition 
declared $13,724 in assets against $57,589 in liabilities. In July 2012, they moved to 
convert the Chapter 13 petition to a Chapter 7 petition for discharge of their debts. In 
September 2012, they asked that the petition be dismissed. (FORM, Items 2, 4, 6, and 
7) 
 
 In response to DOD interrogatories in March 2016, and in response to the SOR, 
Applicant established that she has paid or otherwise resolved the debts listed at SOR 
1.a – 1.c, 1.f, and 1.j. The debt at SOR 1.d is for a truck belonging to Applicant’s ex-
husband. This was reflected in the Chapter 13 information provided in her response to 
interrogatories. The debt alleged at SOR 1.k is also attributable to her ex-husband. 
(FORM, Items 2, 4, 6, and 7) 
 
 Applicant has always filed her federal and state income tax returns on time. The 
tax debts alleged in the SOR were the result of malfeasance by the person Applicant 
and her ex-husband used to file their returns between 2007 and 2009. Applicant 
contacted the IRS and her state tax authority in November 2014 about her tax 
obligations. Those agencies determined that her tax debts were not collectable due to 
her difficult financial conditions. The IRS and state tax authority will resolve those debts 
by diverting any income tax refunds to which Applicant may be entitled. (FORM, Items 
2, 6 – 8) 
 
 Applicant did not disclose her past-due tax debts or the other debts as alleged. In 
response to the SOR, she denied doing so intentionally claiming she misunderstood 
what was required. As to omission of her bankruptcy, Applicant averred that she did not 
list the 2011 petition because she and her ex-husband withdrew it before any 
repayment plan or discharge went forward. As to her taxes, she believed the debt was 
not collectable because the IRS and state tax authority had closed the case. As to 
Applicant’s omission of her other debts, Applicant provided information showing she 
was working to resolve some of those debts before completing the e-QIP and was not 
 
4 
 
delinquent. She was not aware of the other debts at issue in the SOR. For the same 
reasons, she affirmed her negative e-QIP answers with a DOD investigator during her 
September 2015 subject interview. (FORM, Items 2 and 7) 
 
 As of March 2016, Applicant had minimal positive cash flow each month after 
expenses. However, those expenses included payments to several of the debts listed in 
the SOR. Because Applicant established most of those debts have been paid off, she 
has more money left over each month since the latter half of 2016. Applicant lives 
frugally and, apparently, without reliable court-ordered support of her ex-husband. 
Applicant has not incurred any new delinquent or past-due debts since submitting her e-
QIP. (FORM, Items 2, 6, and 7) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9  
                                                 
6 See Directive, 6.3. 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
 
5 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information. A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s debts reasonably raised the 
security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant has been experiencing significant financial problems since at least 
2009, when she and her ex-husband became delinquent on their mortgage. 
Additionally, they accrued significant tax debt due to the actions of the person who 
prepared their 2007 – 2009 income tax returns. The remaining debts stemmed from 
Applicant’s separation and resulting loss of income. This information requires 
application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently 
filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax as required). 
 
 I have also considered whether the record supports application of any of the 
following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
                                                 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 I conclude all of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has paid or 
otherwise resolved all of the debts attributable solely to her. Although the outstanding 
tax debts remain, Applicant’s ex-husband also shares responsibility for those debts. The 
IRS and state tax authority are not demanding direct payment from Applicant, and they 
are satisfied with resolving the debts through annual diversions of her tax refunds. Most 
of the financial problems presented herein resulted from conditions largely beyond 
Applicant’s control; yet she has acted responsibly in repaying what debts she could, 
starting well before she submitted her e-QIP and before the SOR was issued. 
Applicant’s current finances show that she lives well within her means and that she has 
not incurred new unpaid debts. On balance, available information is sufficient to mitigate 
the security concerns established by the Government’s information. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant deliberately tried to hide adverse 
information about her finances when she submitted her e-QIP and when she spoke with 
a DOD investigator. Such information raises the following security concern addressed at 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
7 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or 
polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 More  specifically, to be disqualifying, Applicant’s omissions and false statements 
to investigators must have been made intentionally. If Applicant intended to make such 
false statements, the following AG ¶ 16 disqualifying conditions would apply: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
 I conclude from all available information probative of this issue that Applicant did 
not intend to mislead the Government by her omissions or other statements. Her 
explanations of mistake are sufficiently plausible to show lack of intent. As to the taxes, 
she knew she has always filed her returns as required, and the IRS had told her the 
case was closed on her unpaid debts for the three years addressed in the SOR. As to 
her bankruptcy, she and her ex-husband did not go through with the petition. As to her 
other debts, she was already paying or had already resolved the debts that were her 
responsibility. Others she did not know about when she submitted the e-QIP. Based on 
all of the foregoing, I conclude that, although Applicant provided inaccurate answers to 
e-QIP questions about her finances, she did not have the intent to mislead or deceive 
the Government about those finances. The security concerns under this guideline are 
resolved for Applicant. 
 
 
8 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the record evidence as a whole shows that the doubts about Applicant’s 
suitability for a clearance raised by the Government’s information have been resolved. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
