1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 16-02221 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
October 20, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption); and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 5, 
2015. (Item 3.) On October 14, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines G and E. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 2, 2016 (Item 2), and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing (Answer). Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on November 28, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as 
Items 1 through 7. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
 
2 
 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on 
December 8, 2016, and did not respond. Items 1 through 7 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. 
Having considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have 
been the same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the alcohol consumption allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
He failed to specifically admit or deny SOR allegation ¶ 2.a, which refers to the 
allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and alleges that that same conduct raises 
additional security concerns under personal conduct. In the absence of a clear 
admission, the failure to respond will be deemed a denial. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant, age 36, is married and has one child. He earned a master’s degree in 
2010. He has worked for his current employer since November 2015. (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant was arrested in Virginia in January 2012 and charged with Public 
Intoxication. Applicant explained: 
 
The night in question I went out to watch the game and had one too many 
drinks. I was walking home and urinated outside. I was embarrassed to 
wake up in jail realizing that I had chosen to consume too much alcohol 
that night. I did not intend to get as inebriated as I did, and I accept full 
responsibility for my actions. (Item 2.) 
 
Applicant reported he paid a fine of $114, and was released on his own 
recognizance. He did not have to appear in court and was not court ordered to attend 
any alcohol treatment or counseling. (Item 2; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was employed by a Federal contractor from March 2014 to July 2015. 
His employment was terminated by his employer on July 16, 2015, because he, “came 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). 
 
 
3 
 
to work intoxicated and behaved inappropriately.” (Item 3.) Applicant explained he was 
under a great amount of pressure and stress at work.  
 
After leaving the client site on July 16th [he] went home. [He] had a few 
drinks, and [he] had forgotten that [he] was supposed to go to the 
[employer’s] office that afternoon. Rather than reschedule the 
appointment, [he] chose to come in to work under the influence and it was 
the worst mistake [he] could have made. (Item 2.) 
 
 An incident report reflects Applicant arrived at his employer’s office between 
1:00pm and 1:30pm on July 15, 2015. A colleague reported to the employer that 
Applicant was “in her personal space at her cubicle, slurring and repeating his speech 
and eventually kissed her on the cheek, which was not invited and made her very 
uncomfortable.” (Item 7.) Applicant was confronted by his manager and was excused 
from work the rest of the day. He refused a taxi and insisted he was able to drive. (Item 
7.) His employment was terminated the next day. As a result of his termination, he was 
unemployed for four months. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 7.) 
 
Applicant claimed that he no longer engages in alcohol consumption on his SCA. 
(Item 3 at 34.) However, his Answer implied that he continues to consume alcohol, but 
in moderation. He stated in his Answer, “I am now 35 years old, and have come to the 
realization that I am no longer in a position where I can afford to make poor personal 
choices that reflect unfavorably in my holding a security clearance. I no longer drink if 
I’m stressed or worried as I have found that the consequences are far too great.” (Item 
2.) He has become more involved with his church. (Item 3 at 34.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
 
4 
 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing 
the welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and 
 
5 
 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 Applicant had two alcohol-related incidents in 2012 and 2015. The first was a 
2012 arrest for public intoxication, after Applicant consumed too much alcohol watching 
a sports event. The second incident caused his termination from his employment in July 
2015, after Applicant over imbibed during the workday after leaving his client’s site and 
prior to returning to his place of work. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol incidents were recent and continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability and trustworthiness. While he acknowledged he had a problem with 
self-medicating with alcohol to overcome stressful situations, not enough time has 
passed to be sure that his claimed pattern of modified consumption will be sustained. 
Initially, when completing his SCA in 2015, he indicated he was completely abstaining 
from alcohol use. In his 2016 Answer, he indicated he stopped “excessive alcohol 
consumption” and no longer drinks when he is stressed. The evidence presented does 
not support full mitigation of the Government’s concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
6 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
  Applicant’s excessive alcohol consumption has led to one arrest and his 
termination from employment. This conduct creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress and could affect his personal, professional, and community 
standing. The evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has taken steps to reduce his alcohol consumption, and thereby reduce 
his vulnerability to coercion, but not enough time has passed to be sure that he will not 
over imbibe in the future. His two alcohol-related incidents continue to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. It is too soon to say whether Applicant will 
engage in further inappropriate behavior. He failed to present sufficient information to 
overcome the Government’s concerns under Personal Conduct. 
  
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole 
person. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines G and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by his 2012 arrest for public intoxication and his 2015 termination. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2 Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
