 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03127 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On January 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
  
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
On February 1, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated February 22, 2017, was provided to him by letter that same 
day. Applicant received the FORM on March 3, 2017. He was afforded a period of 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant submitted additional information within the 30-day period.2 On October 1, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f, with explanations, and denied SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.g, and 1.h, with explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Background Information3 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old senior project engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2015. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his 
current employment. He reported receiving a secret security clearance in 2000 while 
employed by a defense contractor.   
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1992. He was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in May 1997, and was awarded a master of business administration 
degree in April 2009. Applied married in April 1999, and has a 19-year-son and a 17-
year-old daughter. His son recently began college and his daughter is in high school. He 
did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Applicant’s post-FORM submission was marked as Item 7, and received into evidence. 
 
3 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges eight delinquent debts consisting of a mortgage and 
seven consumer accounts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – l.h) These allegations are established 
through Applicant’s admissions, in part, and the Government’s exhibits. (Items 2 – 6) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems trace back to when he resigned from his job in July 
2014 for personal and family reasons and was unemployed or underemployed until his 
current job. During this period of unemployment or underemployment, he worked three 
part-time jobs that did not provide enough income to sustain his mortgage and credit 
card payments. (Items 2, 3, 7) Recognizing his financial dilemma, Applicant sought and 
found a steady job with his current employer in 2015. (Item 7) 
 
Department Counsel discussed the shortcomings of Applicant’s SOR answer in 
his FORM, to include the lack of evidence documenting mortgage loan rehabilitation 
and lack of documentation for two debts that he claimed were paid. Department 
Counsel also noted that although Applicant sought financial counseling, he did not 
employ any financial counseling or consolidations services. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant addressed or clarified these shortcomings in his FORM response. He 
sought financial counseling with a law firm and consulted a bankruptcy attorney. 
Evaluating his options, rather than filing bankruptcy, he chose to rehabilitate his credit 
by using the debt stacking method.4 (Item 7)  
 
 Following the debt stacking methodology, Applicant targeted his mortgage 
account, which was his largest debt: 1.a - $20,374 past-due with a loan balance of 
$283,215. Applicant successfully rehabilitated his mortgage beginning in October 2016 
and provided documentation of timely payments until the FORM record closed in April 
2017. His March 6, 2017 credit report indicates that his mortgage account is current. 
(Item 7) Additionally, Applicant provided documentation of payment in full for the two 
debts previously claimed as paid in his SOR answer. Those debts are 1.g, a delinquent 
medical account for $136; and 1.h, a delinquent medical account for $110. (Item 7) 
 
 Applicant stated that his lengthy unemployment and underemployment “severely 
impacted (his) credit.” The financial hardship prompted him to seek his current job that 
                                                          
4 Debt Stacking Defined – “By taking into account the interest rate and amount of debt, debt stacking 
identifies a way for you to pay off your debts. You begin by making consistent payments on all of your 
debts. The debt that debt stacking suggests that you pay off first is called your target account. When you 
pay off the target account, you roll the amount you were paying toward your next target account. As each 
debt is paid off, you continue this process. Debt stacking allows you to make the same total monthly 
payment each month toward all of your debt and works best when you do not accrue any new debts. You 
continue this process until you have paid off all of your debts.”  http://www.primerica.com/public/debt-
stacking.html  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
he needs to regain financial responsibility adding that the welfare of his family has been 
his priority. (Item 7) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his 
behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement.   
 
Partial application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Although Applicant’s choice to 
leave his employment in 2014 could be characterized as voluntary, he could not have 
predicted that his part-time jobs would have created such a financial shortfall. 
Recognizing that his three part-time jobs were not producing the income needed to 
support his family and remain financially afloat, he sought and found his current job. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are fully applicable. Applicant received financial 
counseling, his debts are being resolved, and there are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved. He has rehabilitated his mortgage, he has paid 
two smaller debts, and he will continue paying off his remaining debts. Following the 
advice received through financial counseling and utilizing the debt stacking method, 
Applicant is approaching his debts in a responsible and measured way.5 AG ¶ 20(e) is 
not relevant. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor weighs 
heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He 
is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts are 
resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
                                                          
5 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
(internal citations omitted). 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will resolve the remaining debts on 
his SOR and maintain his financial responsibility.6  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Failure to comply with payment plans or other delinquent debt will raise a security concern. The 
Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. The 
Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, investigation, 
and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from subsequently 
revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security significance of past 
conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security significance.” ISCR 
Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to grant Applicant’s security 
clearance is conditional. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
