1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )
) ISCR Case No. 16-02229 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On October 25, 2016 Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
On December 17, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
On August 2, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
10/20/2017
 
2 
 
notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for August 24, 2017.1 I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4, Hearing Exhibits (HE) I-II, and 
Administrative Notice (AN) I were admitted without objection.  Applicant and three 
witnesses testified, and he presented several documents, which were admitted into 
evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-BB without objection. I received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 7, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges foreign influence security concerns based on Applicant’s 
relatives in Afghanistan. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1983. Shortly after his birth, Applicant and 
his family fled to Pakistan due to the Soviet invasion and lived in Pakistan from 1983 to 
June 2003. Applicant served as a linguist for U.S. military and government personnel in 
Afghanistan from April 2004 to June 2008. Based upon his service to the United States, 
Applicant received his U.S. permanent-residency status in about December 2008. He 
then lived in the U.S. for about six months. In July 2009, Applicant resumed his 
employment as a linguist serving U.S. military and government personnel. He has spent 
most of the last 13 years as a linguist in combat zones in Afghanistan. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2014.2 
 
 Applicant’s parents, wife, two brothers, four sisters, and mother-in-law are 
citizens of and reside in Afghanistan. Applicant met and married his wife in September 
2013. They have three small children, who are dual citizens of the United States and 
Afghanistan and reside with Applicant’s wife in Afghanistan. Applicant’s wife has U.S. 
permanent-residency status. While working in Afghanistan, Applicant visits his family on 
a monthly basis. He provided significant financial support to his siblings and parents in 
the past, but now provides financial support only to his wife and children. From his 
earnings as a linguist, Applicant has saved approximately $400,000 and is actively 
house-hunting in the United States with the intention of moving his wife and children to 
the United States in the near future.3  
 
 Applicant’s father is retired, having served as a clerk for the Afghanistan 
government after the Taliban was removed from power. Applicant has two brothers who 
are citizens of and reside in Afghanistan. One brother is self-employed and the other 
                                                          
1 With the notice of hearing, Applicant received a memorandum from the DOHA Chief Administrative 
Judge notifying all applicants that, although the SOR referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006, all DOHA Administrative Judges are required to apply the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 2017, pursuant to Security Executive Agent Directive 
4 (SEAD 4). 
 
2 GE 1-4. 
 
3 GE 1, 4; AE E. 
 
3 
 
brother sells jewelry. Neither brother is associated with the government or military in 
Afghanistan, and none of Applicant’s female relatives have ever been employed.4 
 
 Applicant has two brothers who reside outside of Afghanistan. One brother is a 
citizen of and resides in the United States, having formerly served as a linguist for the 
U.S. military in Afghanistan. The other brother is a citizen of and resides in the United 
Kingdom, and he works for a private company.5  
  
 Three witnesses testified as to Applicant’s service as a linguist for U.S. 
government and military personnel in Afghanistan. I found all three witnesses’ 
testimonies sincere, credible, and compelling. Two highly-ranked and highly-decorated 
U.S. military officers, each with over 30 years of military service, described their 
interactions with Applicant while serving in combat zones in Afghanistan. Both officers 
believed they and their troops survived their deployments in Afghanistan due to the 
trustworthiness, reliability, good judgment, and bravery of Applicant. Applicant served as 
a linguist for the U.S. military in combat environments, including at one point carrying a 
wounded U.S. soldier for medical evacuation during a firefight. Both officers have 
maintained close contact with Applicant for nearly a decade and consider him as close 
as a sibling.6  
 
 The third witness served as a U.S. foreign service officer for nearly 30 years. 
Applicant had served as his interpreter in Afghanistan, and they have remained in close 
contact for more than a decade. The witness entrusted his life to Applicant on many 
occasions in dangerous environments in Afghanistan, and he has absolute trust in 
Applicant.7  
 
 Applicant also submitted 16 letters of recommendation from U.S. military and 
government personnel and 11 certificates commemorating his service to the U.S. 
military in Afghanistan. These references emphasized the challenging and dangerous 
environment, Applicant’s exemplary character, and that U.S. military and government 
personnel unequivocally entrusted Applicant with their lives.8  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts concerning Afghanistan: 
 
 The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan 
because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. 
citizens. Travel to all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe due to the ongoing risk of 
                                                          
4 GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
5 GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. 42-62, 80-81. 
 
7 Tr. 62-72. 
 
8 AE A-D, F-BB. 
 
4 
 
kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed 
rivalry between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and indirect fire, and 
suicide bombings and insurgent attacks. 
 
 Afghanistan continued to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the 
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network and other insurgent and terrorist groups. The 
border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan remains a safe haven for terrorists.  
 
 The U.S. Department of State reported that the most significant human-rights 
abuses in Afghanistan were widespread violence, armed insurgent groups’ attacks on 
civilians and killing of persons affiliated with government, torture and abuse of detainees 
by government forces; widespread disregard for the rule of law, and little accountability 
for those who conduct human rights abuses.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
9 AN I. 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
“The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
[sensitive] information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.”10 The nature of a nation’s government, 
its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. “An applicant with family members living in a country hostile to 
the U.S. has a very heavy burden to show that they are not a means through which the 
applicant can be subjected to coercion or exploitation.”11 
 
 One disqualifying condition under this guideline is relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-12659 at 3 (May 30, 2013). See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
15, 2011). 
 
6 
 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology. 
 
To establish AG ¶ 7(a), the Government must demonstrate a “heightened risk” of 
exploitation due to Applicant’s contacts with his family members in Afghanistan. Given 
the activities of several terrorist organizations within Afghanistan and the human-rights 
abuses committed by both the terrorist organizations and the Afghani government 
forces, the Government has established the requisite “heightened risk.” Applicant’s 
relationships with his relatives in Afghanistan create a potential conflict of interest. 
Therefore, AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
None of Applicant’s family members is employed by or associated with the 
government or military in Afghanistan; however, significant security concerns remain 
due to the activities of terrorist organizations within Afghanistan. Moreover, Applicant 
maintains close relationships with his relatives in Afghanistan. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do 
not apply. 
 
Security-clearance determinations are predictive judgments as to whether an 
individual will safeguard classified information. The DOHA Appeal Board has identified 
“an exception in Guideline B cases in which applicants demonstrate that they have 
made significant contributions to national security in dangerous, high-risk 
 
7 
 
circumstances.”12 In this case, Applicant demonstrated his significant contributions to 
national security while serving in high-risk combat environments over most of the last 13 
years. U.S. military personnel have repeatedly and unreservedly entrusted Applicant 
with their lives. Several U.S. military personnel have maintained relationships with 
Applicant and consider him a member of their own families. The witnesses’ testimonies 
and the 16 letters of recommendation were particularly compelling in their support of 
Applicant’s character and service on behalf of the United States. Notwithstanding 
Applicant’s own immediate family members in Afghanistan, he has forged deep and 
longstanding relationships with U.S. government and military personnel. The depth and 
breadth of Applicant’s relationships in the U.S. are such that he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, should any conflict arise. AG 
¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships in the U.S. mitigate the 
foreign influence security concern triggered by his contacts with family members in 
Afghanistan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B and the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s character and performance in combat environments are very well-
regarded by his personal and professional references. His deep and lifelong 
relationships with U.S. government and military personnel are such that any conflict of 
interest can be expected to be resolved in favor of the U.S. interest. I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 10-05329 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2011). See ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 3-4 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 9, 2008). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.g.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
