 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03502 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 18, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated November 18, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated January 19, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on February 24, 2017, and he was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on March 
12, 2017. Applicant’s response was due on April 11, 2017. As of October 1, 2017, 
Applicant had not submitted any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, the sole factual 
allegation pertaining to financial considerations (¶ 1.a.) of the SOR. Applicant’s 
admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has served as a 
part-time asbestos abatement supervisor for two separate employers since April and 
August 2010. He has also been self-employed as a painting contractor and handyman, 
and he previously held a variety of full-time and part-time positions with other employers. 
He received a bachelor’s degree in 1983 and a master’s degree in 1988. Applicant has 
never served in the U.S. military. He was granted a top-secret security clearance in 
September 1998. Applicant was married in 1988. He has two daughters, born in 1993 
and 1995, and one son, born in 1999.  
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations 
A review of Applicant’s recent credit reports reflect no delinquent accounts or past-
due balances.3 However, on April 16, 2012, a judgment in the amount of $73,758.66 was 
filed against him in a state court.4 It appears that the issues that resulted in the judgment 
commenced sometime in 2007 when Applicant’s nephew by marriage wanted to open a 
tractor and equipment business, but did not have sufficient means to qualify for loans to 
start the business. Applicant agreed to sign a loan note guaranteeing repayment of a 
particular loan. Applicant received no financial interest in the company and owned no 
stock. He took a position with the new company from September 2007 until September 
2008 as the treasurer and chief financial officer. The business subsequently failed, and 
Applicant’s nephew filed for bankruptcy, leaving Applicant responsible for the deficiency 
between the value of the repossessed equipment collateral and the balance of the note. 
Applicant’s nephew failed to appear as a witness on Applicant’s behalf. Applicant candidly 
reported the financial issue in his November 2015 e-QIP. He acknowledged that he had 
not made any payments on the judgment, and he stated he was exploring legal options.5  
During his interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in June 2016, Applicant claimed he had not heard from the 
judgment-holder since the judgment was filed, and there were no efforts to garnish his 
wages. He expressed “mixed feelings of whether or not to obtain counsel again to resolve 
the issue. If [his] failure to resolve the issue adversely affects his security clearance [he] 
will seek counsel to clear the matter up.”6 That statement does not reach the level of a 
promise to pay the debt.7 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant again admitted that the 
judgment remains unpaid.  
The SOR identified only the unpaid judgment. There is no evidence to indicate that 
Applicant has recently made any efforts to contact the judgment-holder to resolve the 
judgment, or what specific legal options he may have explored. The judgment has not 
been resolved. 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. There is no evidence of a budget; any financial counseling; or that Applicant 
                                                          
3 See Item 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated February 22, 2017); Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and 
Equifax Credit Report, dated November 28, 2015). 
 
4 Item 7 (Final Judgment, dated April 16, 2012); Item 7 (Judgment Information, released August 19, 2016). 
 
5 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 15, 2016); Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated 
January 19, 2017). 
 
6 Item 4, supra note 5. 
 
7 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute 
for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR 
Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
ever contacted the judgment-holder to arrange a repayment plan. Applicant offered no 
evidence to indicate that, despite the judgment, his financial situation is under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”8 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”9   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”10 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.11  
                                                          
8 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
9 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
10 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
                                                          
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. In 2012, a judgment was filed against Applicant in the amount of $73,758.66. 
Because of his failure to take any positive action to address the judgment, it appears that 
he is unwilling to do so. Applicant admitted that the judgment remains unresolved. AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”14 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” 
I have concluded that none of the AGs apply. Applicant guaranteed payment on a 
note for a loan for his nephew’s business. When that business collapsed, and his nephew 
went through bankruptcy, the creditor went after Applicant to seek payment on the loan. 
When no resolution was reached, the creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant. The 
judgment remains unsatisfied, five years later. Applicant failed to explain what legal 
options he explored to either address the judgment, or which led to his decision to ignore 
                                                          
14 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
it. Applicant argued that AG ¶ 20(a) should apply because the issue occurred close to ten 
years earlier; it was infrequent; and it occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur. That position has little merit under the AGs.15  
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. 
Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without further action, are insufficient. 
 
There is no evidence of a good-faith effort to contact the judgment-holder to 
resolve the judgment.16 There is little evidence that the conditions that may have resulted 
in the financial issues were largely beyond Applicant=s control.  He signed the note as a 
guarantor should the primary borrower falter, knowing that he had the legal and moral 
responsibility to honor the note in the event of a default. Generally referring to legal 
options without further information does not equate to a plan. Applicant offered no 
evidence to indicate that his financial situation is now under control. There is no evidence 
of financial counseling, a budget, or any dispute. Equally as important, there is no 
evidence that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, and that failure to do 
so continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.17 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
15 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s ongoing, 
unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of the 
Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 
15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
16 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.18   
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no evidence of 
misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected information. He is a 
well-educated individual. He took on substantial financial responsibilities when he signed 
the loan as a guarantor for his nephew. He has held a top-secret security clearance since 
1998. He candidly admitted the judgment in his e-QIP and was open in his discussions 
regarding the judgment when he was interviewed by the OPM investigator.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There is a 2012 judgment against Applicant for $73,758.66. Although 
Applicant was aware of his delinquent debt since that time, and years before he received 
the SOR, he made no efforts since 2012 to address the delinquent judgment. He 
supposedly searched for legal options, but never took any positive action to resolve the 
judgment. It appears that he simply ignored the judgment. Considering the lack of 
evidence regarding his current finances, and the absence of character evidence regarding 
Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness, I am unable to reach a positive 
conclusion pertaining to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:19 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
                                                          
18 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a very poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, avoiding the judgment in his name, and failing to take any corrective 
actions. Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
