                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
       -------------------------------------                  )      ISCR  Case No.  16-03236           
                                                           )               
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.    
 
Statement of Case
On December 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
recently amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by
DoD on September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 9, 2017, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on March 13, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on April 24, 
2017. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits (AEs A-B). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on May 2, 2017.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested permission to keep the record
open to permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with updated information
regarding the status of his time-share foreclosure. For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted 14 days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to
respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a deed of
foreclosure of the time-share covered by SOR debt ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s submission was
admitted without objection as AE C.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly incurred past due balances on two time-
share accounts. One for $7,013 (SOR debt ¶ 1.a) and another for $352 (SOR debt ¶ 1.b).
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified the electronic questionnaires for electronic
processing (e-QIP) by omitting his two delinquent time-share debts.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations covered by
Guideline F with explanations. He claimed he could not sell back his time share units to
the timeshare owners covered by SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a-b after concerted efforts to do so. 
Addressing SOR debt ¶ 2.a, Applicant denied falsifying the e-QIP he completed in
May 2015. He claimed he had limited information about the foreclosure of the time-share
unit covered by SOR ¶ 1.a at the time he completed the e-QIP in May 2015, and did not
know at the time that his time-share units were either foreclosed or defaulted. 
Applicant claimed to be a reliable, trustworthy person with children and
grandchildren, and with a successful career in the private sector. He claimed he made an
embarrassing mistake with timeshares. 
   
    1 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD 4), dated
December 10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who require initial
or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were
established to supercede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures
for administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DoD 5220.6, subject to
the updated substantive changes in the guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were
in effect as of the date of issuance of the SOR would not change the decision in this case. 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior business analyst for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in July 1985 and has four adult children from his marriage.  (GEs
1-2) Applicant completed his high school education in June 1977. (GE 1) He earned a
bachelor’s degree in May 1981. (GE 1) Applicant reported no military service. (GEs 1-2) 
Since May 2015, Applicant has worked for his current employer. Between January
2000 and May 2015, he worked for other defense contractors. (GE 1; Tr. 23-25) He
reported brief periods of unemployment in 2012 and 2008. (GE 1)
Applicant’s finances 
Applicant presented with some history of financial difficulties. Credit reports reveal
that he purchased two time share units: one in August 2012 for approximately $63,954
(SOR debt ¶ 1.a) and another in 2011 (SOR debt ¶ 1.b) for an undisclosed amount that
carried monthly payments of $352. (GEs 2-4 and AEs A-B; Tr. 29, 40-41) Applicant
became delinquent with his time-share accounts in 2015 and ceased making monthly
payments on both of them. Before receiving any foreclosure notices from SOR creditor ¶
1.a, Applicant tried to return the units to the creditor, but was declined by the creditor. He
was unsuccessful, too, in enlisting the SOR ¶ 1.a creditor’s assistance in refinancing the
units. (Tr. 27-29, 32-33, 50-52) In May 2014, Applicant received a notice of foreclosure
from creditor ¶ 1.a that confirmed Applicant’s default of his agreed monthly installments
and the creditor’s decision to accelerate of the balance due on the promissory note and
initiate foreclosure proceedings. (AE A) 
Records document that his SOR debt ¶ 1.a time share unit was foreclosed by the
owner in June 2014 and sold to the owner at a public auction sale in June 2014 for
$23,235. (AEs A-C) After crediting the sale proceeds to the time-share owner, Applicant
was left with a deficiency balance of $40,719. (AE C) This deficiency balance has not
been paid by Applicant and remains outstanding.
In December 2015, SOR creditor ¶ 1.b served Applicant with a notice of default.
(AEs A-B) After consulting with others, he made a strategic decision to “leave the two
shares as outstanding debt.” (Tr. 27, 31-32) To date, Applicant has not paid any of the
past-due time-share payments on this indebtedness and refuses to do any more on the
account. (GE 4) His efforts to obtain information from the creditor about the unit dues
before returning the unit to the creditor in February 2014 were not successful. Applicant
disputed this debt but provided no documentation covering the substance of the dispute.
(Tr. 39-40) 
3
Currently, Applicant lives within his means and has no other reported delinquent
debts. His credit reports reveal no other delinquent debts. (GEs 2-4) Applicant provided
no evidence of financial counseling or budgeting. Nor did he furnish any character
references, performance evaluations, or evidence of community and civic contributions for
consideration.
e-QIP Omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in May 2015, Applicant omitted the two timeshare
debts covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b when he responded to the financial questions posed in
Section 26 of the e-QIP. (GE 1) He claimed he misread the question and did not
intentionally omit the information. (GE 1; Tr. 25) 
Questioned by the OPM investigator who interviewed him in October 2016 (three
months after completing his e-QIP), Applicant acknowledged his time-share debts without
any evidence of confrontation by the OPM investigator who interviewed him. (GE 4) At the
time, he had not received a notice of default from creditor 1.b and did not consider either
of his time shares to be in default. (Tr. 26)
Applicant’s claimed honest mistakes in reading the financial questions covered by
Section 26 of his e-QIP are reinforced by his prompt, good-faith corrections of his
delinquent time-share omissions when first asked about the information in his OPM
interview. Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s delinquent time-
share omissions in his e-QIP, inferences are warranted that his omissions were the result
of mistaken understandings and were not made intentionally. 
    P   o  l i c  i e  s     
The SEAD 4, App. A lists new AGs to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. 
These AGs include conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that could
mitigate security concerns. These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether
or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with SEAD 4, App. A, ¶
(2)(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in SEAD 4, App.
A, ¶ 2(a) of the AGs. These AGs are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
4
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk.  See  SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d) The following AG ¶ 2(d) factors
are pertinent: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5)
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure to live within one’s means satisfy debts and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information . . . An individual who is financially
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise
questionable acts to generate funds  .  .  .   AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the guidelines, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
5
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent time
share debts exceeding $7,000, with one account (SOR ¶ 1.a) ending in foreclosure with
a deficiency balance of $40,719 and the other account (SOR ¶ 1.b) resulting in an
undetermined loss on the time share unit. Applicant’s delinquent time share debts
warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the guidelines:
DC ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” DC ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts
regardless of the ability to do so,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also implicit  in
financial cases.
While extenuating circumstances account for some of Applicant’s difficulties in
obtaining short sale approvals and workable loan modifications with his time-share
creditors, they do not fully explain his willingness to walk away from his properties
without exploring other payment and resolution alternatives. More information is needed
from Applicant to assess the scope and sufficiency of his payment efforts. Taking into
account all of the circumstances associated with his accumulated delinquent time-share
debts, Applicant’s circumstances merit only partial application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending
practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances.”
6
To date, Applicant has made no visible efforts to save his two time-share units
from default and foreclosure, or address his delinquent balances extant with both
properties. His inactions reflect no material income shortfalls that could affect his
financial ability to meet his creditor obligations and avoid sustained defaults. Without
more definitive explanations from Applicant of his economic circumstances that
contributed to his defaults on his time-share payments, he cannot avert conclusions that
his actions represented strategic defaults in both instances. See ISCR Case No. 14-
06440 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).   
Personal Conduct concerns
Applicant omitted his time-share delinquencies in the e-QIP he completed in May
2015. He attributed his omissions to insufficient information about the status of his time-
share units at the time he completed his e-QIP. 
Applicant’s explanations are plausible and credible under all of the circumstances
considered and are reinforced by his good-faith disclosures when asked about the
payment status of his time-share units by the OPM investigator who interviewed him in
November 2016. Allegations of falsification of the e-QIP Applicant completed in May
2015 are unsubstantiated.
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent time-
share accounts and his failure to address them before and after he defaulted in his
contractual obligations with the creditors reflects poorly on his judgment and reliability in
managing his finances. 
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s accumulation of
time-share debts and failure to address them in responsible ways that could have
avoided material deficiency balances with both time-share creditors preclude his
meeting mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline governing financial
considerations. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b of Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.b:                       Against Applicant 
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):               FOR Applicant
Subpara. 2.a:      For Applicant
7
Conclusions                                 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
9
