 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03416 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 3, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated November 3, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated January 5, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on January 30, 2017, and she was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on February 
3, 2017. Applicant’s response was due on March 5, 2017. As of October 1, 2017, 
Applicant had not submitted any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments nearly all of the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.n.) of the SOR, 
although she both admitted part, and denied part, of one such allegation (¶ 1.l.). 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has served as a 
parttime explosive expert since September 2015. She has also been a fulltime customer 
service representative with another company since August 2015. She previously worked 
fulltime or parttime for a number of employers, as a customer service representative, 
quality assurance specialist, and cashier. She is a 1996 high school graduate. Applicant 
has never served in the U.S. military. Applicant stated that she was granted a secret 
security clearance, but she failed to indicate when that action took place. Applicant was 
married in 2002 and divorced in 2005. She married again in 2006, was separated from 
April 2012 until January 2014, but reconciled in January 2014. She has a daughter, born 
in 2008.  
  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations3 
Applicant was fired on two occasions by employers for different reasons, neither 
of which is alleged in the SOR,4 and those incidents resulted in periods of unemployment. 
She was unemployed from May 2014 until December 2014 for poor job performance 
(during which she was supported by unemployment benefits, and there were no financial 
hardships); and from July 2015 until August 2015 for too many absences (during which 
she was supported by her husband, and there were some financial hardships). Applicant 
mentioned a period during which her husband was unemployed, but she failed to indicate 
when that occurred or what impact his status had on the family finances. It appears that 
Applicant’s finances became an issue as far back as 1997 when there was a dispute 
regarding a student loan, and again commencing in 2010 when some other accounts 
started to become delinquent. The first of two state tax liens was filed in 2011. At some 
point after her daughter was born in 2008, and her husband lost his job, finances were 
tight, and Applicant was unable to pay her rent. In her November 2015 e-QIP, Applicant 
candidly listed a number of delinquent accounts. In December 2015, when she was 
interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), she 
expressed surprise that some of the accounts she was questioned about were delinquent, 
and claimed to be unaware of other accounts. She indicated that she had received an 
extension from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) with respect to filing her 2015 income 
tax return, but acknowledged that she had missed the filing deadline.5  
                                                          
3 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated November 21, 2015; Item 5 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated October 28, 2016); Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated December 21, 2015); Item 
2, supra note 2; Item 1 (Answer to the SOR, dated January 5, 2017). 
 
4 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal Board. 
(Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) 
to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, 
n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). One of Applicant’s state tax 
liens and her terminations by employers will be considered only for the five purposes listed above.   
 
               5 The legal requirement to file a federal income tax return is based upon certain conditions, including an 
individual’s gross income and other enumerated conditions. Once it is determined that there is an obligation to so file, 
the following applies: 
 
Any person required under this title to pay any estimated tax or tax, or required by this title or by 
regulations made under authority thereof to make a return, keep any records, or supply any 
information, who willfully fails to pay such estimated tax or tax, make such return, keep such records, 
or supply such information, at the time or times required by law or regulations, shall, in addition to 
other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be 
fined not more than $25,000 ($100,000 in the case of a corporation), or imprisoned not more than 1 
year, or both, together with the costs of prosecution. In the case of any person with respect to whom 
there is a failure to pay any estimated tax, this section shall not apply to such person with respect to 
such failure if there is no addition to tax under section 6654 or 6655 with respect to such failure. In 
the case of a willful violation of any provision of section 6050I, the first sentence of this section shall 
be applied by substituting "felony" for "misdemeanor" and "5 years" for "1 year." 
  
26 U.S.C. § 7203, Willful failure to file return, supply information, or pay tax. 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant stated that she had previously had repayment plans for several accounts 
in place, but that she had been unable to keep up with her payments under those plans. 
She indicated that she hoped to pay off the accounts in the next three to six months, 
following December 2015, “by sending in one lump sum or by making a significant impact 
on each account.” She hoped her new job would enable her to obtain the funds to put 
together a budget so that she could create repayment plans. Applicant “wants to take 
care of [her] accounts,” and she hoped her financial status would get better, because she 
was addressing the accounts that she could.6 She acknowledged that she had never 
received credit counseling.  
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated for all of the delinquent accounts, “a 
financial plan is in place.” She failed to submit documentation to support her contentions 
that: creditors or collection agents had been contacted; repayment plans had been 
established; payments had been made; or accounts had been resolved. There are no 
copies of account statements, cancelled checks, bank statements or registers, receipts, 
or letters from creditors or collection agents reflecting any positive activity – documented 
proof to substantiate compliance with repayment arrangements – with respect to the 
accounts. 
In addition to the one allegation regarding Applicant’s failure to timely file her 2015 
federal income tax return, the SOR identified 13 purportedly delinquent accounts that had 
been placed for collection, charged off, or filed as a lien, as generally reflected by 
Applicant’s 2015 or 2016 credit reports. Those debts, totaling approximately $11,498, 
their current status, according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the 
Government and Applicant, are described as follows:  
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is a residential lease with an unpaid balance of $4,538 that was 
placed for collection. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account 
remains delinquent, but added her comment that “a financial plan is in place.” The account 
has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is a government overpayment with an unpaid balance of $2,197 
that was placed for collection. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the 
account remains delinquent, but added her comment that “a financial plan is in place.” 
The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c., and 1.f. through 1.k.): These are all medical debts with remaining 
unpaid balances of $444, $287, $268, $265, $72, $30, and $20 that were placed for 
collection. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the accounts remain 
                                                          
 
6 It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future 
are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible 
manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 
1999)). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
delinquent, but added her comment that “a financial plan is in place.” The accounts have 
not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a gas utility account with an unpaid balance of $442 that was 
placed for collection. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account 
remains delinquent, but added her comment that “a financial plan is in place.” The account 
has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): This is an unspecified type of bank account with an unpaid balance 
of $413 that was placed for collection and charged off. In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted that the account remains delinquent, but added her comment that “a 
financial plan is in place.” The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.m.): This is a state tax lien in the amount of $1,934 that was filed in July 
2012. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the lien remains unresolved, but 
added her comment that “a financial plan is in place.” The lien has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.n.): This is a cable account with an unpaid balance of $588 that was 
placed for collection. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the account 
remains delinquent, but added her comment that “a financial plan is in place.” The account 
has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.l.): Applicant failed to timely file her federal income tax return for the tax 
year 2015. As noted above, Applicant had received an extension from the IRS with 
respect to filing her 2015 income tax return, but acknowledged that she had missed the 
filing deadline. Attached to her Answer to the SOR, Applicant submitted an unsigned and 
undated copy of a self-prepared Form 1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return (Form 
1040) for the tax year 2015. That form indicates she is due a refund of $1,137. The issue 
has been resolved. 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because she did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect her net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. Her Form 1040 reflects an adjusted gross income for 2015 of $36,852. There 
is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of any financial counseling. Applicant 
offered no evidence to indicate that her financial situation is now under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”7 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
                                                          
7 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”8   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”9 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced substantial 
evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant has the 
burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or 
mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.10  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”11  
                                                          
8 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
9 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
11 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”12 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. In addition, AG ¶ 19(f) may apply for “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required.” Applicant’s credit reports reflect 13 delinquent accounts, 
including a state tax lien, and she has admitted that the accounts are still delinquent. She 
failed to timely file her federal income tax return for the tax year 2015. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 
19(c), and 19(f) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
                                                          
 
12 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”13 Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”14 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” Under AG ¶ 20(g), it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has 
made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and 
is in compliance with those arrangements.” 
 AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
since 2010 or before make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent,” or that it is “unlikely to recur.” Applicant noted some unspecified financial 
hardships during her most recent period of unemployment, as well as a period of her 
husband’s unemployment. It appears, however, that those issues occurred after she 
started experiencing financial difficulties.  
Rather than addressing the 13 delinquent accounts, over a substantial period of 
time, Applicant simply took no action to resolve them, including some accounts with very 
modest delinquent balance of $20, $30, and $72. Aside from Applicant’s verbal and 
                                                          
13 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s ongoing, 
unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of the 
Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-
01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
14 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
written comments regarding her debts, there is little documentary evidence to support her 
claimed good-faith efforts to address those debts. Of the 13 debts identified in the SOR 
that had been placed for collection, charged off, or filed as liens, Applicant failed to submit 
documentation to support her contentions that: creditors or collection agents had been 
contacted; repayment plans had been established; payments had been made; or 
accounts had been resolved. There are no copies of account statements, cancelled 
checks, bank statements or registers, receipts, or letters from creditors or collection 
agents reflecting any positive activity – documented proof to substantiate compliance with 
repayment arrangements – with respect to the accounts. 
Applicant has been credited with filing her federal income tax return for the tax year 
2015. It remains unclear as to why she would choose to delay obtaining the refund due 
her with respect to her 2015 taxes when she has so many delinquent accounts. Also, 
Applicant’s observation that, within six months after December 2015, she will be in a 
better position to address her debts, is simply a hope for financial improvement, not a 
strategy for a financial plan. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct in furtherance of the plan may provide for the payment of 
such debts one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without further 
confirmed action, are insufficient. 
 
There is no evidence of a good-faith effort to contact the creditors to resolve the 
accounts.15 There is little evidence that the conditions that may have resulted in the 
financial issues were largely beyond Applicant=s control. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling, a budget, or any disputes. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that her 
financial situation is now under control. Equally as important, there is no evidence that 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, and that failure to do so continues 
to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.16 
 
  
                                                          
15 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.17   
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no evidence of 
misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected information. 
Applicant has been employed fulltime by two employers since September 2015.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There are 13 delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR with a combined unpaid 
balance of $11,498. Although Applicant was questioned about the delinquent accounts by 
the OPM investigator in December 2015, and she promised to resolve them within six 
months, she apparently made no efforts since that time to address any of those delinquent 
accounts, including ones with the delinquent balances of $20, $30, and $72. Her 
unsubstantiated comments that “a financial plan is in place” for the accounts are simply 
insufficient to prove that she made any of those good-faith efforts. There is no evidence 
that she disputed any of the accounts.  
As noted above, Applicant was fired by employers for a variety of reasons, none of 
which are alleged in the SOR. She had two state tax liens filed against her (only one was 
alleged in the SOR). Her lack of attention to, and lack of compliance with, the rules of her 
employers, the rules of the state, as well as the law regarding the timely filing of federal 
income tax returns, appear to be an unacceptable pattern of conduct. Considering the 
lack of evidence regarding her current finances, and the absence of character evidence 
                                                          
17 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
regarding Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness, I am unable to reach a 
positive conclusion pertaining to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:18 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, avoiding the debts in her name, and failing to fulfill her promises to 
take timely corrective actions. Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from her financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.k.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m. and 1.n.:  Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
