 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01253 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 16, 2014. On July 
10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 4, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on November 30, 2016. On December 5, 2016, a complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 through 6, was sent to Applicant, who 
was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on December 23, 2016, and 
did not respond. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 3, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on December 18, 2014. The PSI was not authenticated as required by 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to 
comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions 
or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. I conclude that Applicant waived any objections to the PSI summary by 
failing to respond to the FORM. “Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like 
lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights 
under the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old information technology specialist employed by a defense 
contractor since May 2014. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from March 1999 
to March 2013 and received an honorable discharge. He married in August 2001, 
divorced in June 2008, and remarried in March 2010. He has custody of a 14-year-old 
daughter from his first marriage, and he has two stepchildren, ages 17 and 15. He was 
unemployed for about a month before being hired by his current employer. He held a 
security clearance in the Navy and retained it as an employee of a defense contractor. 
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling about $39,648. The debts are 
reflected in credit reports from November 2014, March 2016, and November 2016. (Items 
4, 5, and 6.) The evidence concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: mortgage loan past due for $16,537, with a balance of $290,149. 
Applicant stated that he talked to a bank representative, who informed him that his 
automatic allotment was for an amount sufficient to pay the interest on the loan but not 
the principal. He stated that the allotment was adjusted and the issue resolved. He 
submitted a printout of his bank account reflecting several adjustments in his allotment to 
the lender between February and April 2016. The past-due payments are resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: deficiency after repossession, charged off for $8,150. Applicant 
stated that the lender agreed to accept $114 payments twice a month. He provided the 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
names of the persons he contacted but submitted no documentation of a payment 
agreement or payments made under an agreement. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: credit-card account charged off for $5,615 in November 2012. 
Applicant stated that the creditor had no record of this debt and advised him to dispute it 
with the credit bureau. He submitted no documentary evidence of his efforts.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: cellphone account referred for collection of $3,713 in September 
2014. Applicant stated that the debt was for unreturned equipment, but that the provider 
had changed and he could not find someone to receive the equipment. He stated that he 
had disputed the debt, but he submitted no documentary evidence of a dispute. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: cellphone account referred for collection of $619 in November 
2012. Applicant stated that he made a payment agreement providing for payments of $51 
per month. He provided the name of the person who agreed to a payment agreement, but 
he submitted no documentation of an agreement or payments made under an agreement. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: debt to city government referred for collection of $129 in October 
2013. Applicant stated that a city representative told him the debt was paid in April 2015 
by a tax offset. He provided the name of the city representative but no documentation 
showing that the debt was paid. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: account referred for collection of $4,984 in October 2014. Applicant 
stated that a representative of the collection agency informed him that the debt had been 
sold to another collection agency. He provided the first names of representatives from 
both agencies, both of whom told him that their agency had no record of the debt. He 
stated that he disputed the debt, but he provided no documentary evidence of a dispute. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
 4
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
 5
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
following disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) 
(“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. However, none of the 
above mitigating conditions are established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.g. They 
are numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence 
 
 6
unlikely. He has presented no evidence of conditions beyond his control or responsible 
conduct. He has presented no evidence of financial counseling. He stated that he 
disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g, but he submitted no documentary 
evidence of a dispute. He claimed that he had resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 
and 1.g, but he provided no documentary evidence to support his claims. Instead, he 
merely provided names of individuals with whom he dealt.  
 
It is reasonable for an administrative judge to expect an applicant to present 
documentary evidence showing resolution of specific debts. See ISCR Case No. 15-
03363 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). Providing investigative leads such as the names of 
individuals who can verify a transaction does not suffice. Under the Directive, an 
administrative judge has no obligation to gather information for either party in a case. The 
Directive makes it clear that it is responsibility of the parties to present evidence for the 
administrative judge’s consideration. ISCR Case No. 08-10170 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2011). 
Furthermore, the Directive does not authorize an administrative judge to act as an 
investigator for either party in a security clearance proceeding. ISCR Case No. 15-01515 
at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2016. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I have considered Applicant’s honorable 
Navy service. I have considered that he was previously entrusted with a security 
clearance while in the Navy. Because he requested a determination on the record without 
a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on 
demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
  
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 7
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
