 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-02296 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about her debts. She also 
deliberately omitted adverse information about her finances from her security clearance 
application. Her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On November 23, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her 
employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
 
 On September 15, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns under the adjudicative guidelines2 for financial 
considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). Applicant timely 
responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on March 21, 2017, and I convened the requested hearing on 
June 15, 2017. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered two 
items identified as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and proffered 
one item identified as Applicant Exhibit (Ax.) A.3  I held the record open after the hearing 
to receive from Applicant additional relevant information. She timely submitted 
documents identified as Ax. B – F. I admitted each party’s exhibits without objection.4 I 
received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 26, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $25,033 for 16 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.p). In response, Applicant admitted SOR 1.a 
and 1.o. She denied the remaining allegations.  (Answer) 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately made a 
false official statement to the Government when she answered “no” to questions in e-
QIP Section 26 (Financial Record), thereby omitting the debts alleged at SOR 1.a – 1.p. 
(SOR 2.a) Applicant denied this allegation. (Answer) In addition to the facts established 
by Applicant’s admissions to SOR 1.a and 1.o, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. She and her husband have been married since 
December 1998. A previous marriage ended in divorce in March 1994 after seven 
years. She has two adult children from her first marriage. (Gx. 1)  
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 At the time they issued the SOR, DOD adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director of National 
Intelligence issued a new version of the adjudicative guidelines, to be effective for all adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. In this decision, I have considered and applied the new adjudicative guidelines. My 
decision in this case would have been the same under either version. 
 
3 A copy of Department Counsel’s January 19, 2017 “discovery letter” and a Government Exhibit List also 
are included as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I and II, respectively. 
 
4 Applicant also submitted a sixth item post-hearing. It was a link to an on-line credit management 
account. Applicant proffered in her forwarding email that the account would show a record of debt 
payments. Unfortunately, the account link required an account name and password that Applicant did not 
provide. I have admitted her submission as Ax. G; however, I have assigned it minimal weight. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant worked as a truck driver from November 2005 until October 2010, 
when her employer relocated and she found herself out of work. In March 2011, 
Applicant again found work as a state corrections officer. In March 2015, she decided to 
leave that job and enroll in a three-month long school for long haul truck driving. In June 
2015, she started working as an over-the-road truck driver and now requires a 
clearance to work on DOD contracts. 
 
 The Government produced a credit report that documents all of the debts alleged 
in the SOR. The debts at SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.e – 1.l, 1.o and 1.p are for delinquent medical 
bills. Six of the debts are for less than $200 each. Applicant claimed these debts stem 
from expenses incurred after she suffered a heart attack at the beginning of 2005. Her 
employer-sponsored medical insurance covered only 80 percent of the costs. Applicant 
testified that after the remaining costs went unpaid, Applicant received notices from 
creditors trying to collect and was aware of the debts when she completed her e-QIP. 
However, in other testimony, she claimed she was unaware of these debts when she 
completed her e-QIP. As to her answers to e-QIP Section 26 questions in general, 
Applicant testified she did not understand the questions. (Gx. 2; Tr. 21, 25 – 26, 28 – 
29, 33, 42, 49 - 50) 
 
 The debts at SOR 1.a and 1.n represent the remainder due after voluntary 
repossession of two vehicles. Appellant has resolved the SOR 1.n account (Ax. A; Ax. 
F); however, the SOR 1.a debt remains unresolved. Appellant did not list either debt in 
her e-QIP because she thought the fact she returned both cars to the dealer meant 
there was no further obligation. The debt reflected in SOR 1.n arose when Applicant 
could not afford to pay the loan after she left her corrections job to go to trucking school. 
(Ax. A; Ax. F; Tr. 26, 30 – 32, 36 - 38) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.d is for a delinquent cable television account. Applicant 
testified she was unaware of this debt when she completed her e-QIP. Applicant 
resolved this debt around the time of her hearing. (Ax. B; Tr. 20, 24, 34) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.m is the result of a dispute over a security deposit at a prior 
residence leased by Appellant. She testified she was not aware of this debt when she 
submitted her e-QIP. Applicant paid this debt a few days before her hearing. (Ax. C; Tr. 
20 – 21, 24) 
 
 In 2014, Applicant retained the services of a firm specializing in credit repair and 
negotiating with creditors. That firm has reported to Applicant that the debts at SOR 1.k 
and 1.l were removed from her credit history in December 2014. The debts at SOR 1.b 
and 1.c were removed in January 2015. The debt at SOR 1.d was removed in May 
2015, and two of the debts (otherwise unspecified) owed to the creditors at SOR 1.f – 
1.h were removed in September 2015. Applicant pays the firm $99 each month for their 
services, which also include access to information about personal financial 
management. Applicant has viewed that information, but has not acted on it. (Ax. D; Ax. 
E; Tr. 21, 38 - 40) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Applicant testified her finances are sound. She is able to meet her current 
obligations, and she sometimes provides modest financial support for her children and 
grandchildren. A month before the hearing, Applicant and her husband were able to 
purchase outright parcels of undeveloped land from her parents’ and her husband’s 
parents’ estates for $10,000. She also purchased outright two used cars for about 
$4,500. As of the hearing, Applicant was past-due in filing her state and federal income 
tax returns. (Tr. 40 – 42, 43 - 48, 53 – 54) 
  
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are: 
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information.  
 
 A security clearance decision resolves only whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have access to 
classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible 
information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. 
 
                                                 
5 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government’s information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances. That concern is stated at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Available information documented the SOR allegations that 
Applicant owes or owed a significant level of past-due or delinquent debt. 
       
 I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are recent and 
continuing. Her larger debts (SOR 1.a, 1.e, and 1.i) remain unresolved. As to AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant did not establish that her debts arose from circumstances beyond her 
control. Certainly, her heart attack would fall into that category; however, it occurred 12 
years ago. Applicant was aware of her obligations when she was receiving collection 
notices, but she did not act on those debts until late 2014 and 2015. At that time, the 
credit repair firm she hired caused the debts to be removed from her credit history. 
Other debts (SOR 1.d, 1.m, and 1.n) were not beyond her control. The car repossession 
debt at SOR 1.n arose when Applicant left a state job to go to trucking school. Her 
inability to pay that car loan was a direct result of her own decision. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Although Applicant has received assistance with 
credit repair and negotiating with creditors, she has not availed herself of the financial 
management resources offered by the credit repair firm. Applicant did not clearly 
establish that her financial problems are under control. 
 
Finally, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Although Applicant has paid or resolved 
several of her debts, she did not do so in a timely manner indicative of responsibly 
meeting one’s obligations.  
 
Applicant has made progress in addressing her longstanding debts; however, 
she has not established a reliable record of fiscal responsibility that inspires confidence 
that her financial problems will not recur. On balance, Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the security concerns raised by the Government’s information. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant did not disclose any of her past-due or delinquent debts when she 
submitted her e-QIP. Applicant denied any intent to mislead the Government about her 
finances. The Government established through sufficient circumstantial evidence that 
 
 
7 
 
 
her omissions were intentional. This information raises a security concern about 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness expressed at AG ¶ 15: 
 
  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 Available information shows that Applicant was aware of most of the delinquent 
or past-due debts reflected in the SOR. She received collection notices for medical bills 
that went unpaid after her heart attack, and she knew that she had voluntarily returned 
two cars because she was unable to continue making payments on those car loans. 
While it was reasonable that she may not have been aware of all of the listed debts, she 
clearly was aware of others and should have disclosed them in her e-QIP. Her stated 
reasons for not doing so were not plausible, and her testimony on this issue was 
conflicting. Available information requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG 
¶ 16(a): 
 
  deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 I have also considered the following AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions that are 
pertinent in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or 
significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual specifically 
concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the requirement to 
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and 
truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 As to AG ¶ 17(a), Applicant did not establish that she attempted to correct her 
omissions in a timely manner. To be fair, however, the record does not reflect that 
investigators interviewed Applicant during her background investigation. Such 
interviews often offer applicants their first opportunity to correct or at least explain their 
omissions. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply because Applicant did not establish that her 
negative answers resulted from improper advice.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because intentional false statements are not minor 
offenses. Applicant’s submission of her e-QIP was her first interaction with the 
Government’s attempt to assess her suitability for access to classified information. In 
addition to demonstrating her hesitation to be fully candid with the Government about 
adverse information in her background, Applicant’s false statements potentially violate 
federal law (18 U.S.C. § 1001). On balance, available information is not sufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
 
 I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s actions to resolve her debts are not sufficient to satisfy the 
security concerns raised by her financial problems. Information about her omissions of 
adverse information from her e-QIP further sustains doubts about Applicant’s judgment 
and trustworthiness. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of 
these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against granting eligibility for a 
security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
