KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: In his recitation of the policies required for clearance adjudications and in his
statement of his ultimate conclusion, the Judge cited to the correct standard. We find no reason
to conclude that his various references to Applicant’s estimable qualities mean that he failed to
apply the standard mandated by Egan and by the Directive. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-00276.a1
DATE: 10/30/2017
DATE: October 30, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00276
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
8, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On August 18, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge employed the correct
standard in evaluating Applicant’s clearance eligibility; whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has two bachelor’s degrees and a law degree.  He is married but has no children. 
He served in the military for over 23 years, five on active duty and the remainder in the Reserves. 
He retired as an O-5.  During his service, Applicant received numerous awards and decorations as
well as letters of appreciation.  His fitness reports attest that he is “supremely talented” and that he
is a person who follows rules and regulations.  Decision at 2.  Since his retirement he has worked
for Government contractors.  His current  employment began in May 2007.  His civilian
performance reports are similar in quality to those he received in the military.  
Applicant was first granted access to classified information upon his commissioning as an
officer in 1989.  “His clearance as a civilian . . . flows from the clearance granted to him when he
entered active duty and while serving in [the Reserves].”  Id. at 3.  In 2008, he submitted to a
polygraph examination administered under the auspices of another Government agency.  At first,
he was not granted a clearance, but he lodged a successful appeal and still holds that clearance with
his current employer.  Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for following “all of the rules.”  Id.
at 4.  
In Autumn of 2013, Applicant used marijuana twice in celebration of his birthday.  He and
his partner were in a foreign country where marijuana use was legal.  Applicant has not used
marijuana since.  He is still with his partner, who has not used marijuana since late 2016.  Applicant
stated that he does not intend to use marijuana again.  In Summer 2006, Applicant used ecstasy.  At
the time he was recoiling from the breakup of a five-year relationship, one that he had believed
would last a lifetime.  Applicant was not thinking about the status of his clearance at the time of this
misconduct.
In his Answer to the SOR and in his hearing testimony, Applicant contended that at the time
of his security-significant conduct he was under a misunderstanding about the status of his security
clearance.  He did not know that his clearance was still active.  He had not worked in a classified
environment or on a classified project for some time prior to his misconduct. 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that the mitigating conditions set forth in the Directive must be evaluated
in light of the facts of a particular case.  With that in mind, he concluded that it “is incomprehensible
to believe that Applicant did not know that he was eligible for access to classified information when
he used ecstasy in 2006 and marijuana in 2013.”  He described Applicant as a “highly sophisticated
person . . a lawyer [and] Judge Advocate . . . and high-level civilian [employee] for a . . .
contractor.”  The Judge stated as follows: “I find that Applicant knew his security clearance was
active when he used the controlled substances in 2006 and 2013.”  Id. at 7.  The Judge cited to
evidence that Applicant’s misconduct was voluntary and not under unusual circumstances.  “These
circumstances are not unusual and can easily happen again.”  Id.  Accordingly, he concluded that
there has not been an appropriate period of abstinence sufficient to show a change in lifestyle.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge reiterated that “Applicant had to know that he was
eligible for access to classified information and recall to active duty when he used controlled
substances.”  Id. at 9.  Though he may not have been thinking about his clearance at the time of his
misconduct, he was in fact eligible for access at the time.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s
excellent reputation and professional attainments were not enough to outweigh the adverse
significance of his drug misuse.  The Judge noted that Applicant candidly disclosed his misconduct
and, had he not done so, it would likely have gone undetected.  However, he went on to note that
the misconduct was in contravention of Federal law as well as military law and evidenced a lack of
judgment.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to the Judge’s characterization of him as highly sophisticated and “not your
average Applicant for a security clearance.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  He argues that the Judge held him
to a higher standard than is applied to other applicants.  
The standard utilized in security clearance determinations is that set forth in Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988):  “[A] clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly
consistent with the interests of the national security.”  Accord, Directive ¶E3.1.25.  It is binding
upon DOHA Judges, who have no authority to apply a different one.  In addition, each case must
be decided upon its own merits, and a Judge must consider all aspects of the evidence that bear upon
the applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b); ISCR Case No. 04-
00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  
In the case before us, the challenged comments were made as part of the Judge’s evaluation
of Applicant’s claim not to have known that he was eligible for access to classified information
when he used illegal drugs.  In that light, it was perfectly reasonable to note Applicant’s background,
experience, and sophistication, insofar as they present him as a person likely to have understood the
true status of his clearance.  The Judge also cited to Applicant’s experience and accolades as part
of the whole-person analysis, which, again, was consistent with the requirements of the Directive. 
On the other hand, in his recitation of the policies required for clearance adjudications and in his
statement of his ultimate conclusion, the Judge cited to the correct standard.  We find no reason to
conclude that his various references to Applicant’s estimable qualities mean that he failed to apply
the standard mandated by Egan and by the Directive.
In a related issue, Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings, in particular that
Applicant knew or “had to know” that he was eligible for a clearance at the time of his misconduct. 
We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant evidence as a
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 16-02402 at 2 (App. Bd.
Aug. 16, 2017).  
The evidence, viewed as a whole, is consistent with the challenged finding.  For example,
the Judge engaged in the following colloquy with Applicant: 
[Judge]:  [T]here’s a difference between having the eligibility and actually looking
at classified information.
[Applicant]: Yes, your honor.
[Judge]: You didn’t–you probably did see it–
[Applicant]: No sir.
[Judge]: –but you knew that you could at any time be given classified information
because you’re eligible to–you were eligible for it?
[Applicant]: Yes, your honor . . .
[Judge]: What was the purpose for submitting that application . . . in December 2013
that the Government introduced? . . . 
[Applicant] It’s a periodic reinvestigation as . . . they instructed me.
[Judge] So as a periodic reinvestigation, did you realize that you still had access to
classified information at that time?
[Applicant]: I had eligibility for access was clear to me at that time . . . 
[Judge]: At the time you used in 2013, what was your thought process as, “Hey, can
I do this, because I’m eligible for access to classified information?
[Applicant] . . . I was not thinking of it.  If I had, it wouldn’t have occurred.  Tr. at
59, 62-63
Given Applicant’s testimony, his professional experience, his education, and his experience in
completing clearance applications and in holding a clearance, the Judge’s finding that Applicant
knew or reasonably should have known that he was eligible for access to classified information is
supportable.1  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are based upon substantial evidence
or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-04724 at 3 (App.  Bd. Aug. 18, 2017). 
Applicant challenges the Judge’s mitigation analysis, arguing, among other things, that it is
contradictory.  He notes that the Judge made extensive findings that were favorable to him, such as
his excellent military and civilian work records and his reputation for following the rules,
contending that these things should have led the Judge to issue a favorable decision.  However, the
presence of some mitigating evidence does not compel a favorable decision.  The Judge must weigh
the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable or
1Applicant also challenges the Judge’s comment to the effect that the precipitating circumstances associated
with his misconduct might occur again.  He argues that this is speculative and supported by no evidence.  However, we
conclude that this was a reasonable inference from the evidence.  
vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08711 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2017).  In this case, it was
not contradictory for the Judge to note Applicant’s many positive qualities and achievements but to
conclude that they were not enough to outweigh concerns arising from multiple uses of an illegal
drug while holding a security clearance.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to show that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Id.   
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  See ISCR Case No. 14-03450 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015) (An applicant’s use of illegal
drugs after having completed a security clearance application raises questions about his or her
judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations). The decision is
sustainable on this record.  See Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
