 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01751 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 21, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-6 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on 
November 29, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections and did 
not submit any evidence. Items 3-6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. The admissions 
are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since 2008. He 
is currently separated from his wife, pending divorce. He has one child and one 
stepchild. He graduated from high school and has taken some college courses. He has 
held a security clearance since 2009.2  
  
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $24,195. The 
largest debt is related to an automobile repossession (SOR ¶ 1.a). The remaining 
delinquent debts are for a repossessed motorcycle (¶ 1.b), three consumer debts (SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.g), and two medical collection accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.f). The debts are 
supported by credit reports from May 2016 and March 2015, Applicant’s January 2015 
security clearance application (SCA), and by Applicant’s SOR admissions.3 
 
 Applicant revealed in his SCA that he and his wife separated in 2012. She left 
with a truck that they had financed. She returned it to him after the truck went into 
default status. Applicant voluntarily turned the truck into the dealer. It was sold at 
auction, and Applicant and his wife were held responsible for the deficiency. 
Documentation from Applicant’s employer shows that his wages have been garnished 
since October 2014 to reduce this debt. This documentation shows as of May 2016, 
Applicant’s remaining unpaid balance as $11,975. In his answer, Applicant claims his 
balance is now $8,700 and that the debt will be paid in December 2017.4 
 
 Applicant provided no proof of payment or the establishment of payment plans 
for the remaining debts. He claimed he contacted the creditor of a repossessed 
motorcycle several times to work out a plan, but the creditor refused. He explained that 
                                                          
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
4 Items 2, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
he could not make any progress on the remaining debts because of his expenses 
related to his divorce and providing child support payments. The remaining debts are 
unresolved.5 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial situation or a 
budget. There is no evidence of financial counseling.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Items 2-6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved because of his 
inability or unwillingness to pay them. I find all disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant’s separation from his wife and his pending divorce is a condition 
beyond his control, however, he failed to take responsible actions to address his debts. 
Even though he is repaying the largest debt, that payment occurs because of a wage 
garnishment not a voluntary payment plan. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply. Other 
than the wage garnishment, Applicant failed to provide documentation showing any 
efforts to contact the creditors, set up payment plans, or make payments on the debts. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his civilian 
employment. Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
