 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03403 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On November 18, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant, under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
  
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
On December 17, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated January 23, 2017, was provided to him by letter on 
January 24, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on February 2, 2017. He was afforded 
a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information within the 30-day period.2 On 
October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e through 1.k, with explanations, and 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.l through 1.n, with explanations.  Additional findings of 
fact follow.  
 
Background Information3 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old solution architect employed by a defense contractor 
since July 2015. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his current 
employment. In his FORM response, he stated that he held various levels of security 
clearances from 2002 to 2011. (Item 6)   
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree in May 1984, and was awarded a 
master’s degree in December 1988. Applicant married in June 1986 and divorced in 
June 1990. He married a second time in September 1996 and divorced in August 2012. 
Applicant has three children from his second marriage, ages 22, 16, and 14. He did not 
serve in the U.S. armed forces. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Applicant’s post-FORM submission was marked as Item 6, and received into evidence. 
 
3 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 14 delinquent accounts totaling about $195,000, including a 
$56,390 tax lien. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – l.n; Item 1) These allegations are established through 
Applicant’s admissions, in part, and the Government’s exhibits. (Items 1 – 5) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies primarily to his 2012 divorce, 
which he described as very contentious and costly. He stated that he spent “[o]ver 
$100,000” in legal fees. His departure from a long-term employment with a defense 
contractor to “adjust to being a single parent” in 2011 and medical costs spanning a 
two-year period associated with treatment and hospitalization of his oldest child were 
also factors cited in the FORM. (Items 1, 2, 3, and 6) 
 
 Department Counsel discussed the shortcomings of Applicant’s SOR answer in 
his FORM, to include the lack of evidence demonstrating Applicant’s efforts to resolve 
his debts. Applicant’s FORM response addressed only two of his SOR debts, discussed 
below. His FORM response shows that his liabilities in his divorce proceedings were 
$226,232, which he said correlated with his SOR debts. (Item 6) 
 
 Applicant stated that the debt in SOR 1.a was allocated to his former wife in their 
divorce. Upon review of Applicant’s documentation, the name of the creditor and 
amount of $744 listed on the SOR is different from the name of the creditor and amount 
of $1,057 listed on his FORM response. Absent additional corroboration such as 
matching account numbers, this evidence is non-persuasive. (Items 1, 6) 
 
To address the July 2013 $56,390 Federal tax lien in SOR 1.b, Applicant stated 
that he is working directly with the IRS to reach a final settlement. He provided a copy of 
a May 30, 2016 IRS notice from tax year 2015 that indicated $5,263 of his tax refund 
had been applied towards his “unpaid balance,” leaving a balance of $18,155. It is 
difficult to discern from this documentation whether this recoupment was applied to his 
outstanding tax lien or some other tax liability.  Again, absent additional corroboration 
demonstrating how Applicant is working directly with the IRS to resolve his tax lien, this 
evidence is non-persuasive. (Items 1, 6) 
 
Unfortunately, the post-FORM evidence Applicant submitted for the two SOR 
debts he addressed was not particularly helpful nor was it helpful that he did not submit 
any evidence for the remaining 12 SOR debts. He stated in his FORM response that 
once he satisfied his IRS debt, he would begin addressing the remaining debts without 
providing a specific plan or timeline of how or when this would occur. (Item 6) I note in 
Applicant’s April 5, 2016 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview 
(OPM PSI), he stated that he incurred his large tax liability when he liquidated his IRAs 
in 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014 to pay for his divorce and did not set aside any tax 
withholdings. During the same interview, he also stated that he made the IRS an offer in 
compromise in August 2015 and the matter was “in a review stage.”  Applicant also 
stated that he anticipated having the IRS debt settled in 2016 and the commercial 
accounts resolved by 2018.   
  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved the vast majority of the 
delinquent SOR accounts. He did not describe financial counseling or present a budget. 
Although, Applicant provided evidence on how he arrived where he is today, he did not 
offer a viable plan on how he planned to resolve his substantial debt. The FORM noted 
that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. As noted, 
Applicant’s FORM response fell short of addressing the concerns raised by Department 
Counsel. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides four disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”; “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” 
Based on the information in the SOR, the record established the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 AG ¶ 20 lists seven potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the 
facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have 
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 
2(d). Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is 
presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information 
suggesting his financial problems are being adequately addressed, doubts remain about 
his suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national interest is 
the principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to 
submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information, and in relying on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish 
mitigation, financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
