 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02722 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline E (personal conduct), 
but failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial considerations). 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On November 18, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
  
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
On January 11, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated February 9, 2017, was provided to him by letter that same day. 
Applicant received the FORM on February 17, 2017. He was afforded a period of 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant submitted additional information within the 30-day period.2 On October 1, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, with explanations; and denied SOR 
¶ 2.a, with explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Background Information3 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old marine inspector employed by a defense contractor 
since June 2015. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his current 
employment.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1986. He attended college part-
time from January 2008 to June 2011, but stopped attending classes before he earned 
a degree. Applicant married in October 1998 and divorced in September 2010. He has a 
14-year-old son from that marriage and pays his former wife $507 in monthly child 
support. Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from September 1986 to September 2006, 
and retired with an honorable discharge. 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Applicant’s post-FORM submission was marked as Item 6, and received into evidence. 
 
3 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $21,760. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
l.e) These allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions and the 
Government’s exhibits. (Items 1 – 5) 
 
 Applicant stated in his SOR answer that during the timeframe of 2007 to 2010, he 
“went through a horrible divorce which at times left me battling to pay off overdue bills 
and credit accounts by myself.” (Item 1) He also reported four periods of unemployment 
on his August 2015 SF-86: (1) January 2015 to June 2015: (2) August 2014 to 
November 2014; (3) June 2013 to January 2014; and (4) August 2011 to March 2012. 
(Item 2)  
 
Department Counsel discussed the shortcomings of Applicant’s SOR answer in 
his FORM, to include the lack of evidence documenting any efforts to resolve his debts, 
particularly since he began his current employment. Applicant made assurances during 
his October 2, 2015 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM 
PSI) that he would resolve or attempt to address his delinquent debts. He reiterated the 
same claim in his January 11, 2017 SOR answer. (Items 1, 3) Applicant submitted 
documentation in his FORM response that debts 1.c – charged-off department store 
account for $347; and 1.e – cell phone collection account for $417, have been settled 
and paid. Debts 1.c and 1.e are resolved. The remaining three larger SOR debts 
totaling $20,996 remain unaddressed. (Item 6) Applicant did not submit evidence of 
financial counseling, a budget, or character evidence. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his August 21, 2015 SF-86, he failed to list any of his 
delinquent debts, as required. He denied that he intentionally omitted his debts, claiming 
that he believed each debt was outside the seven-year reporting period. He did, 
however, acknowledge each of the debts either was in collections or charged-off within 
the requisite period. In reviewing Applicant’s October 2015 OPM PSI, I note that he also 
failed to list other information or provided incorrect information on his SF-86 such as 
incorrect contact information or not listing his father. Applicant stated that he served 20 
years in the Navy and was aware of the consequences of intentionally falsifying 
documents such as a SF-86. (Items 1, 2, 3, and 6) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e. With regard to the remaining three 
SOR debts, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the facts and 
applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). 
Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is 
presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information 
suggesting his long-standing financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain 
about his suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national 
interest is the principal focus of these adjudications. Accordingly, those doubts must be 
resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant stated when he completed his SF-86 he believed his debts were 
outside the seven-year reporting period. I also note that he made other mistakes or 
failed to report required information when completing his SF-86. He discussed these 
shortcomings during his October 2015 OPM PSI. Applicant served 20 years in the Navy 
and presumably has filled out similar forms in the past. Based on the available 
information, it appears Applicant became confused when completing his SF-86. His lack 
of attention to detail cannot be imputed as a willful and deliberate attempt to undermine 
the investigative process. Although the information he provided regarding his financial 
situation on his SF-86 proved to be incorrect, as was other information, I attribute these 
lapses to carelessness and am satisfied that he did not deliberately and intentionally fail 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to disclose his delinquent debts with intent to deceive.4 I find “For Applicant” in the 
Findings section of this decision with respect to SOR ¶ 2. 
 
In closing, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, 
and with regard to financial considerations, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on an 
explanation lacking sufficient supporting documentation to fully establish mitigation, 
financial considerations security concerns remain. As noted, he successfully rebutted 
allegations of falsification under personal conduct concerns. 
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
                 Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
                           Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
       Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
       Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
      
                                                          
4 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
