 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01307 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 25, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 1, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On July 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. (Item 
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 10, 2016.  He requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.)  
On November 28, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 5 Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on November 30, 2016, and received by him on December 16, 
2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
 
2 
 
the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM on January 2017, and submitted one 
exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibit A, which was admitted into evidence.  
Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 5, and they were admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He is married.  He is employed with a defense 
contractor as an Estimating Supervisor.   He is seeking to retain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified ten debts totaling approximately $84,000.  Two debts, SOR allegations 1.f. 
and 1.j., have been paid.  Five debts are student loans, one is a medical bill, one is for a 
delinquent mortgage account, and one is for a consumer debt.  Applicant admits 
allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1d., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.j , set forth in the SOR.  He denies 
allegations 1.g., 1.h., and 1.i.     
 
Credit Reports of Applicant dated June 18, 2015 and June 16, 2016, confirm the 
indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Applicant’s Exhibits 4 and 5.)  Applicant has been 
working for his current employer since December 2012. 
 
The following debts became owing and remain outstanding:  
 
1.a.  A delinquent student loan account owed to the US Department of Education 
was placed for collection in the approximate amount of $2,518.  Applicant states that the 
debt should have been paid through his GI bill benefits.  He claims that he has or will 
dispute the matter.  He has provided no documentary evidence to support his averment.  
The account remains owing.   
 
 
3 
 
1.b.  A delinquent student loan account owed to the US Department of Education 
was placed for collection in the approximate amount of $4,514.   Applicant states that 
the debt should have been paid through his GI bill benefits.  He claims that he has or 
will dispute the matter.  He has provided no documentary evidence to support his 
averment.  The account remains owing.   
 
1.c.  A delinquent student loan account owed to the US Department of Education 
was placed for collection in the approximate amount of $5,804.  Applicant states that the 
debt should have been paid through his GI bill benefits.  He claims that he has or will 
dispute the matter.  He has provided no documentary evidence to support his averment.  
The account remains owing.   
 
1.d.  A delinquent student loan account owed to the US Department of Education 
was placed for collection in the approximate amount of $9,002.  Applicant states that the 
debt should have been paid through his GI bill benefits.  He claims that he has or will 
dispute the matter and that this debt is a duplicate of the debt set forth in 1(e).  He has 
provided no documentary evidence to support his averment.  The account remains 
owing.   
 
1.e.  A delinquent student loan account owed to the US Department of Education 
was placed for collection in the approximate amount of $9,318.  Applicant states that the 
debt should have been paid through his GI bill benefits.  He claims that he has or will 
dispute the matter and this debt is a duplicate of the debt set forth in 1(d).  He has 
provided no documentary evidence to support his averment.  The account remains 
owing.   
 
 1.f.  A delinquent account owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $379.  Applicant settled the debt and provided a copy of the 
payment transaction dated February 4, 2016. 
 
1.g.  A delinquent mortgage account owed to a creditor was 120 days past due or 
greater in the approximate amount of $49,751 with a total balance of $98,827.  
Applicant claims that due to an unexpected interest rate increase, he fell behind on the 
payments and hired a bankruptcy attorney for assistance.  Applicant states that his 
bankruptcy attorney found the account to be charged off due to the home foreclosure in 
2007-2008.  The attorney advised him to disregard the claim.  He has provided no 
documentary evidence to support his averment.  The account remains owing.   
 
1.h.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $3,422.  Applicant believes this is the cost of an ambulance that Tricare 
Prime settled years ago.  He has provided no documentary evidence to support his 
averment.  The account remains owing.   
 
1.i.  A delinquent account owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $232.  Applicant claims that the debt was settled a while back.  
He has provided no documentary evidence to support his averment.  The account 
remains owing.   
 
4 
 
 1.j.  Applicant was cited on April 30, 2015 for a traffic violation.  There is an active 
warrant against him since July 10, 2015, for his failure to pay the fine.  Applicant settled 
this account on or about April 21, 2016.  (See Applicant’s Response to the FORM.)   
 
 There is no documentation in the record to show that Applicant has made any 
financial arrangements or that he has followed through with any agreements he may 
have made with any of his creditors.  Thus, each of the debts listed in the SOR , with 
the exception of 1.f. and 1.j., continue to remain delinquent and owing.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated May 1, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  In response to Section 26 
concerning his financial record, Applicant was asked if in the past seven years, has  he 
failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes when required by law or ordinance?”  He was 
also asked if in the past seven years if he had a lien placed against his property for 
failing to pay taxes or other debts?”  The Applicant answered “NO” to both questions.  
These were false responses.  Applicant failed to disclose state tax liens entered against 
him in 2011 and 2012 which totaled approximately $10,900.  (Government Exhibit 2.)      
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his wife takes care of the 
finances and taxes.  He states that at that time, he had no knowledge of the liens.  He 
and his wife do not talk much and not about money.  However, during his personal 
subject interviews that took place between December 7, 2015 and December 12, 2016, 
Applicant stated that he was aware of the liens and did not disclose them because they 
had been paid.  This contradiction in evidence provided by the Applicant further calls his 
credibility and truthfulness into question.  (See ROI.)   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
6 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant is excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  He has failed 
to prove that he has done anything to resolve all but two of his debts.  The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant states that he is, and has been working to resolve his delinquent debts, 
but he has provided no documentation to substantiate his averments.  He has failed to 
establish that he acted reasonably, responsibly or in good-faith to repay his financial 
obligations or establish a meaningful track record of repayment.  Accordingly it is found 
that all but two of his debts remain owing. Furthermore, Applicant has not demonstrated 
that future financial problems are unlikely.  There are no indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose the two liens filed against him in 2011 and 2012 which 
totaled $10,900, in response to questions about his financial record on his security 
clearance application.  Based upon information he gave the investigator during his 
security clearance subject interview, he clearly knew that he had liens and claims that 
they were paid.  Applicant has provided no evidence to show that they have in fact been 
resolved.  Thus, it can be logically concluded that he willfully chose not to include them 
on the e-QIP.  This behavior indicates questionable judgment, unreliability, and 
untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none of 
them were established in this case.  Applicant intentionally and deliberately attempted to 
conceal material information from the Government regarding the liens that were entered 
against him.  He claims that his wife handles the finances and taxes and he does talk 
with her about these matters, and he did not know about them.  This is unacceptable, 
especially since Applicant told the investigator that the liens had been paid.  Falsifying 
 
8 
 
material information is a serious offense, and Applicant has done nothing to show that 
similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. He has not provided sufficient evidence 
to meet his burden of proof with respect to his personal conduct. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant states that he is 
disputing the student loan debts and has resolved his other debts, but has failed to 
provide any documentation to show proof of payment.  Furthermore, Applicant’s 
credibility is in question.  He must understand the need to ensure that only individuals 
with whom the Government can trust should be provided access to classified 
information.  Applicant has not demonstrated that he is candid, honest, and/or 
trustworthy.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and Personal 
Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
9 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
