 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02780 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant did not 
mitigate security concerns raised by his unresolved financial issues, including a tax lien, 
consumer debt, and student loans. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative 
determination. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM) dated 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
January 12, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on January 26, 2017.2 He did not 
submit any submissions in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017. Based on a review of the case file, submissions, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He graduated from high school in 2001. He attended 
community college and a technical institute, but did not obtain a degree. He served in 
the United States Army from 2003 through 2008. He received a General Discharge. He 
was married in 2003, and divorced in 2011, and he has five minor children. Since 
September 2013, he has been working overseas as an electronics repair technician. He 
has held a security clearance since 2004.  Applicant completed his most recent security 
clearance application in December 2016, disclosing  several delinquent accounts and 
his federal tax lien. He noted that he was working with a lawyer and a tax service to 
resolve the issue.3 The ensuing investigation confirmed these details as well as other 
unresolved financial issues.4  
 
 Applicant’s current background investigation revealed financial problems more 
extensive than those he disclosed on his 2016 security clearance application. Applicant 
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May 2013, and it was dismissed in July 2013. He filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in August 2013, and it was dismissed in October 2013. (1.c 
and 1.d) but states that he owes no money. The debts at subparagraphs 1.j, 1.k, i. and 
1.l, were either claimed to be paid, not his debt, or he simply ignored. The remaining 
fourteen debts at 1.b, 1e.-1.i and 1.m to 1.t He denies without explanation, offering at 
the end that these debts no longer appear on his credit report.  The delinquent debts on 
the SOR, which amount to approximately $63,000, are reflected on the credit reports in 
the record.5 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in 1.a as to the 2013 federal tax lien in the 
amount of $16,717, but he provided no documentation supporting a payment plan. He 
provided no evidence of any payments or plans for the delinquent debts, including the 
student loans. He simply denied all the student loans. He stated that a current credit 
                                                          
2 The Government submitted  seven items for the record. 
3 Item 2 
4 Item 3. 
5 Items  (2-7) 
 
3 
 
report would show that SOR items would no longer appear on a credit report.  The 
investigation also revealed that Applicant owes state taxes. Credit card debts were 
noted and Applicant stated during his investigative interview,  that he planned to pay the 
accounts in full by April 2016. In that interview, Applicant also noted that he was working 
with Lexington Law (a debt consolidation firm) so that he could get his financial issues in 
order. 6  
 
 Applicant earns approximately $6,000 every two weeks in net pay. His wife also 
works, and her monthly pay is about $1,400. He has about $2,000 in savings, and about 
$5,000 in checking.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(d) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
6 Item 3 
 
4 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s finances remain a source of concern. Failure to meet one’s financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.7 Applicant’s 
admissions and the credit reports establish the Government’s prima facie case that 
Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and that he has an 
inability to do so.8 Applicant presented no evidence to mitigate the concerns about his 
tax debt or any payment plans or payments for all the other delinquent debts.9 He also 
denied owing the student loans which appear on his credit report.  Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and were not caused by events beyond his control.   
  
After a review of the record and a consideration of the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2(d), I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems render him unsuitable for 
continued access to classified information at this time. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of financial 
stability necessary to reapply for national security eligibility in the future. Rather, it is 
recognition of the fact that financial issues have historically been a motivating factor 
behind acts of espionage. The award of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. While a favorable decision is not warranted at this time, he may 
present persuasive evidence of financial rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19 (a) and (c). 
 
 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:    Against Applicant 
 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
