 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00779 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
The Government produced insufficient evidence to establish the alleged 
disqualifying conditions, or in the alternative, Applicant mitigated the Government’s 
security concerns under Guideline M, use of information technology, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline M and Guideline E. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 7, 2015, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 18, 2017, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on February 22, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were admitted into evidence.2 The Government’s exhibit list was 
marked as a hearing exhibit (HE I). Applicant testified, but did not offer documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 19, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer (Answer), he admitted in part and denied in part the 
allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of all the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is single, never married, and has no children. He 
has worked for a federal contractor since 2010. He served from 2003 to 2009 in the Air 
Force, both active duty and in the reserve. He received an honorable discharge. He has 
two associate’ degrees, a bachelor’s degree, and a master’s degree.3   
 
 The allegations raised in the SOR include: (1) From 1992 to 2010, Applicant 
illegally downloaded computer software applications, programs, and movies for his own 
personal use without authorization (See SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) Applicant illegally gained 
access to computer applications by using serial numbers, key codes, or other illegal 
means in his place of employment without authorization (See SOR ¶ 1.b); (3) Applicant 
removed information technology (IT) hardware from his employer without authorization 
(See SOR ¶ 1.c). The same allegations were also cross-alleged as personal conduct 
concerns (See SOR ¶ 2.a). 
  
 Applicant has worked with IT issues since he was 17 years old. From 1992 to 
1996, he started his own bulletin board service (BBS) to share game-playing and 
messaging with other users. This was a time before the public internet was available. 
Shareware programs were uploaded to his BBS from other BBS. The purpose of 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 Applicant noted a number of inaccurate statements in GE 2 and made several verbal corrections to the 
document. He also objected to the admission of GE 3 because the interviewer mischaracterized his 
answers regarding his use of software as illegal. I overruled the objection, but advised Applicant that I 
would consider the weight of this evidence when viewed as a whole with the rest of the evidence in this 
case. Tr. 20-27, 30-31; GE 2-3. 
 
3 Tr. 6; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
shareware was to share these programs with other users. He followed the shareware 
user agreements when he either uploaded or downloaded these shareware programs. 
During Applicant’s June 2011 interview with another government agency (AGA), the 
interviewer claimed Applicant stated he downloaded programs from a website. In his 
Answer, Applicant explained that this was impossible then because the public internet 
(from which one would have to download) was not in existence. Applicant believes the 
interviewer did not fully understand the process Applicant was describing and therefore 
characterized actions as “illegal,” which were not necessarily so. After hearing 
Applicant’s testimony and reviewing both summarized statements that he made to 
investigators (GE 2, dated December 2015 and GE 3, made to AGA in July 2011), I find 
that his testimony is credible and more reliable than the July 2011 summarized 
statement and will give it more weight (the Government did not call a witness to explain 
the context of the summarized interview). His testimony is also more consistent with his 
December 2015 summarized statement and his Answer.4 
 
 From 1997 to 2001, Applicant denied downloading any software programs, 
although he did download drivers and networking tools. The Government presented 
insufficient evidence of illegal downloading during this timeframe. From 2001 to 2002, 
Applicant admitted downloading a software program on his personal computer that was 
given to him by a friend. In 2003, he deployed for the Air Force. He was a system 
administrator in his deployed capacity. He admitted installing several software programs 
on his Air Force computer. Some of these programs required activation keys. These 
programs were used to support mission requirements. He did not specifically request 
permission to install these programs, but believed he had the inherent authority to do so 
to insure mission success. He also had access to a “morale” computer while deployed. 
It was used by deployed troops to play games and watch movies. He did not download 
any movies on to this computer. Applicant was awarded an achievement medal for his 
contributions to the overall mission during this deployment.5  
 
 From 2005 to 2006, while working as a system engineer for a health care 
employer, he used his personal laptop computer to support his work efforts. He legally 
purchased hardware with his own funds. This allowed him access to software and 
firmware from vendor’s websites. In March 2006, during a critical system outage at 
work, while troubleshooting the problem, Applicant admitted using a software key (a 
string of characters) on a vendor’s website. He believed he was authorized to use the 
key on a vendor website to support official company work, which is what he did in this 
case.6 
 
 From 2003 to 2006, while pursuing his bachelor’s degree, he downloaded 
software through his college. He obtained this software either through his own 
                                                          
4 Tr. 33-35; Answer; GE 2, 3. 
 
5 Tr. 37-38, 57-59; Answer (Answer Exh. A). 
 
6 Tr.40, 42; Answer. 
 
 
4 
 
 
subscription, or from a friend’s subscription. This software is also available directly from 
the vendor. In 2010, Applicant admitted downloading a program (server) using peer-to-
peer file sharing. He used this program during its trial period, meaning that the vendor 
allowed use of the programs for a limited period for free. He only used the program 
during this trial or evaluation period. The Government failed to establish what actions of 
Applicant were “illegal” and what the basis of the illegality was (statute, rule, regulation, 
company policy, etc.). Applicant was never disciplined or questioned about his software 
usage by any employer. He has had no issues regarding the legitimacy of his 
downloading of software since 2010.7   
 
 When Applicant left his employer in June 2010 (on good terms), he took two hard 
drive trays, which were discarded by his employer. These trays were not computer 
media of any type. They were used to hold and store hard drives. Once the hard drives 
were out of the trays, the trays served no purpose. Applicant realizes that he should 
have asked permission before he took the trays. He sent the trays back to his former 
employer and they were scrapped.8   
 
 Applicant produced five letters of recommendation from former supervisors and 
coworkers. Some worked with him in a classified environment. All have high regard for 
Applicant’s IT abilities and professionalism. They support granting his clearance.9 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
7 Tr. 40, 81; Answer. 
 
8 Tr. 45-48; Answer, Answer (Exh. D-E). 
 
9 Answer (Exh. F). 
 
 
5 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially relevant: 
 
6 
 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified, sensitive, proprietary, 
or other protected information on or to any unauthorized information 
technology system; and   
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
 The Government presented insufficient evidence to establish that Applicant’s 
actions meet either of these disqualifying conditions. I also considered the overall 
concern expressed in Guideline M, and found the evidence wanting. No evidence was 
produced that any of Applicant’s downloading or use of keys violated any law or was 
against any company policy. The hard drive trays were not an information technology 
system. Based on the record evidence, none of the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
 Even though I found none of the disqualifying conditions applicable, I also 
reviewed all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41, and I considered the following 
relevant:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.   
 
 Applicant’s actions can be considered remote since the last alleged concern 
occurred in 2010. He has not experienced another issue concerning information 
technology systems since that time. On the contrary, his supervisors vouched for his 
professionalism. He provided persuasive evidence to show that sufficient time has 
passed since the incidents, that any security issues are unlikely to recur, and that his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment are not in doubt. AG ¶ 41(a) 
applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
The evidence supports that Applicant performed his duties to keep his 
employers’ IT systems working. He did nothing for personal gain and was awarded by 
the Air Force for his performance. Applicant’s taking of two hard drive trays of de 
minimus value, and which were ultimately scrapped, is not a significant misuse of an 
employer’s resources. Insufficient evidence exists to establish this disqualifying 
condition or the overall concern stated in Guideline E.  
However, I also reviewed conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 
and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Given the nature of Applicant’s IT work, if any software programs were 
inadvertently downloaded the last action occurred seven years ago. Sufficient time has 
passed to attenuate Applicant’s actions. I am convinced Applicant has learned from this 
experience and that he will be alert to prevent any recurrence. His fellow IT 
professionals corroborate his current reliability.  AG ¶ 17(c) applies.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.               
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service, including his deployment and his achievement medal, the recommendations 
from his supervisors and coworkers, and the nature of his IT work. Even though the 
Government failed to establish disqualifying conditions, Applicant provided sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the overall security concerns raised by the allegations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude the Government’s evidence was insufficient to establish the alleged security 
concerns, and alternatively, Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
Guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs   1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph    2.a:   For Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
