1  
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
                                                                                   )  ISCR Case No. 16-00693 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department 
Counsel For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement 
and Substance Abuse). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 6, 2015. On 
June 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with 
 
 
 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
2  
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated September 
19, 2016, was submitted by Department Counsel. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 26, 2016. He did not 
submit a response to the FORM. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 
1 to 3) are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old senior software engineer for a defense contractor, 
employed since 2008. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2008 and a master’s degree 
in 2010. He married in 2011 and has no children. He has not previously held a DOD security 
clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana from approximately August 2006 to at 
least October 2015. Applicant admitted the SOR allegation. In his SCA, he disclosed that 
he began using marijuana while in college with varying frequency, but stopped after he 
graduated and was seeking employment. After obtaining his current position in 2008, he 
again started using marijuana about once per month, and then more frequently since 2009. 
He stated his last use was in September 2015. He used marijuana primarily with his spouse 
at his home about once or more per week. His spouse continues to use marijuana and 
purchases it from a dealer unknown to Applicant. In his SCA, Applicant stated that he did 
not intend to use marijuana if he is granted a security clearance and acknowledged that its 
use is prohibited. He asked his spouse to refrain from asking him to use it, and to not use 
it in his presence. 
 
In December 2015, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. During 
that interview, he admitted that he used marijuana, one time, after he completed his SCA. 
He noted his future intent is to abstain from marijuana use because he would like to obtain 
a security clearance. Applicant noted in his answer to the SOR, that obtaining a security 
clearance will assist with work on certain contracts, so he decided to stop using marijuana 
to increase his chances of obtaining a security clearance. 
 
Applicant did not submit evidence of drug counseling or a signed statement of intent 
to abstain from drug involvement. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. My ultimate 
decision would be the same under either set of adjudicative guidelines. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to “control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
3  
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access 
to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has 
not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established 
for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being 
eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
4  
Analysis 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying condition potentially applicable in this case includes: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition). 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 2006 to at least October 2015. Additionally, he used 
marijuana after completing a security clearance application. Disqualifying conditions under 
AG ¶¶ 25 (a) and (g) are applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
 
5  
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without 
recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional. 
 
Applicant is an educated, mature adult. He began using marijuana in college, 
stopped while seeking employment, then began again in 2008, after finding his current job. 
He continued to use it with his spouse until he applied for a security clearance. However, 
after noting his intent to stop using marijuana, he admitted to an additional use after 
completing his SCA. He continued to use marijuana after applying for a security clearance 
with the knowledge that illegal drug use is not permitted by Federal law or presumably his 
company’s policy as a DOD security clearance sponsor. His promises to refrain from future 
illegal drug use are not credible. He used marijuana in his home with his spouse, who 
continues to use it. He has not shown a clear and convincing commitment to discontinue 
further illegal drug use or to change his environment where illegal drugs are being used. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to mitigate Applicant’s illegal drug use. His conduct is 
recent and his claimed period of abstinence is not a sufficient period to show a change in 
attitude and lifestyle. There is insufficient evidence to show that future illegal drug use is 
unlikely to recur. He continues to associate with a regular user of marijuana in his home, 
and he has not participated in drug treatment or avoidance counseling. He did not present 
a signed statement of intent to avoid future use, but he did state such intent in his answer 
and interview. However, the evidence is insufficient to show a demonstrated intent not to 
use illegal drugs in the future. His history of marijuana use, especially after applying for a 
security clearance, continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. No mitigation is applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion may 
not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be found 
ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of questionable 
judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact and 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a mature, well-
educated adult. His history of regular illegal drug use, and continued use after applying for 
a security clearance, leave me with serious questions about his future intent and his 
willingness to follow rules and regulations. I am not convinced that he fully appreciates the 
legal and policy implications of his actions, and he has not clearly and convincingly 
6  
established a commitment to discontinue further illegal drug use. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
