 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-00528  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
October 25, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 19, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On June 24, 2016, Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 2, 2016. She requested that her case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
November 4, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 10 Items, were 
received by Applicant on November 10, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that she 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM.   Applicant failed to respond to the 
FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017. Items 1 through 10 are 
admitted into evidence and going forward are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 
through 10.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 36 years old, and is in a second marriage with five children.  She is 
currently attending college.  She is employed as a Publication Coordinator 2 for a 
defense contractor.  She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with her 
employment.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file her state income tax returns for tax 
years 2012 and 2013; and that she has five delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$6,144.  Applicant admits each of the allegations set in the SOR with some 
explanations, except 1.e., which she denies.  Applicant has never held a DoD security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant explained that she has worked for a defense contractor since October 
2014.  Her position was initially a part-time position that became full time.  Prior to this 
employment, she was unemployed from October 2003 through January 2005 and from 
January 2010 through January 2013.  When she was employed, she worked as a 
substitute teacher.  Applicant was married to her first husband from October 2000 to 
September 2004.  She remarried in April 2005, and indicates that she and her second 
husband are planning on separating in August 2015.  
 
 1.a.  Applicant stated that she did not file her state income tax returns for tax 
years 2012 and 2013 because she was unemployed during those years.  (Government 
Exhibit 2.)  During her personal subject interview in June 2015, she stated that she and 
her spouse were filing together and the two knew that they would owe money, so they 
did not file.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  In January 2014, Applicant was contacted by the 
 
 
3 
 
 
state taxing authorities and informed that she owed approximately $2,400 in back taxes 
for 2012 and 2013.  Applicant claimed that she contacted them and arranged for a 
$50.00 per month payment plan.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  However, in her Response to 
Interrogatories in October 2015, she was asked to provide a copy of her tax payment 
account transcripts for tax years 2012 and 2014.  Applicant initially stated that she had 
not received them, but expected them to be mailed to her within four to six weeks.  In 
her Response to Interrogatories in December 2015, when asked to provide the same 
tax payment transcripts for tax years 2012 and 2014 she stated that there is no such tax 
documentation because the returns have not yet been filed.  (Government Exhibit 6.)  
Applicant now states that her husband has made arrangements to pay the debt.  
(Government Exhibit 2.)  
 
 1.b.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $232.  The debt is reflected as owing on the Applicant’s credit report dated 
June 17, 2016.  Applicant claims that she has set up arrangements to pay the debt.  
(Government Exhibit 2.)  She did not provide documentation to support her claim.  
 
 1.c.  A delinquent debt for unpaid personal property taxes was garnished from 
Applicant’s payroll account beginning in May 2015 in the approximate amount of 
$560.62.  (Government Exhibit 9.)  Applicant states that her husband was wrongfully 
discharged from his job and they could not afford to pay the property taxes.1  Applicant 
now claims that she has set up payment arrangements to pay the debt.  (Government 
Exhibit 2.)   
 
 1.d.  A judgment was filed against you in 2015 by a hospital in the approximate 
amount of $1,049.  The debt remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 10.)  Applicant 
claims that she is preparing an arrangement to pay the debt.  (Government Exhibit 2.)    
 
 1.e.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor for a payday loan, was placed for 
collection in the amount of approximately $152.  Applicant denies this debt and claims 
that it has been paid.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  The debt is reflected as owing in 
Applicant’s credit report of January 2015.  (Government Exhibit 7.)   
 
 1.f.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $4,151.  Applicant explained that this debt is for classes she 
took at college, but which she was unable to finish because her father passed away in 
November 2014.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 6.)  Applicant also claims in her October 
2015 Response to Interrogatories that she had arranged to make monthly payments of 
$256, which were to start on October 2015.  However, because she was returning to 
complete her college degree she would require additional student loans and the amount 
would be financed with new loans.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  In her December 2015 
Response to Interrogatories, there are no payments reflected as having been made to 
the creditor by Applicant to satisfy this debt.  (Government Exhibit 6.)  In addition, the 
                                                 
1 Applicant does not specify the date that her husband lost his job.  (See Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
debt is reflected as owing in Applicant’s credit report dated January 2015.  (Government 
Exhibit 7.)   
 
 In summation, Applicant has provided no documentary evidence to show that she 
has paid anything toward any of her outstanding debts.  Applicant attributes her 
financial problems to her lack of income stemming from her period of part-time 
employment, unemployment, her husband’s wrongful discharge, and her father’s 
passing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
 
5 
 
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes five conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; and 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has not paid her delinquent debts.  It is uncertain from the record 
whether she could not afford to pay her bills or whether she chose to use the money for 
other things.  These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes several conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
It is recognized that circumstances beyond her control, namely, her periods of 
underemployment and unemployment, her husband’s wrongful discharge from his job, 
and her father’s death adversely affected her finances.  However, AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
 
 
7 
 
 
provide full mitigation here.  Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has claimed that she 
had set up payment arrangements to pay the debts, but has done nothing more.  She 
has provided no documentation to demonstrate that she has acted responsibly under 
her circumstances, nor has she received or is receiving counseling, and there are no 
clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control, or 
that she has initiated a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve her debts.  There 
is nothing in the record to show that she has done anything effectively to resolve any of 
the debt.  All of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR remain delinquent.  The record 
fails to establish any mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG 
¶¶ 20(a) through 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who has failed to demonstrate that she has taken reasonable and effective action to 
resolve the financial issues in the SOR.  Her financial problems continue as there is no 
evidence that they have been resolved.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
serious doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security 
clearance.  She has not met her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for Financial Considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
