 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03867  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Attorney At Law, The Edmunds Law Firm 
 
 
October 2, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.)2 The case was assigned to me on May 16, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on June 8, 2017, scheduling the hearing for July 13, 2017. The hearing was convened 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
2 Applicant was represented in his Answer to SOR by Bigley Ranish, LLP 
 
2 
 
as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were admitted 
without objection.  Applicant called two witnesses and testified on his own behalf.  He 
also presented sixteen documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits A through P, 
which were also admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on July 21, 2017. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (China). Department Counsel provided a 
nine page summary of the facts, supported by eleven Government documents 
pertaining to China.  The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary.  
Applicant had no objection.  (Tr. p. 17.)  I take administrative notice of the facts included 
in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not 
subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 61 years old and married.  He has one daughter from his current 
marriage, and one son from a previous marriage.  He has a Ph.D. degree.  He holds the 
position of Engineering Specialist with a defense contractor. He has been working for 
his current employer since September 2004.  He obtained a security clearance in 2005.   
 
 Applicant was born in China in 1955.  He lived with his parents and siblings in 
China until he was about 15 years old.  He was then sent to a labor camp for six or 
seven years where he experienced horrible conditions.  He then returned to his parent’s 
home where he lived for one year before he attended a University in China.  As an 
honor student, after graduating, Applicant was hired by the University as an Assistant 
Teacher, where he taught physics from 1982 to 1986.  He then applied for a University 
sponsored J-1 Visa to come to the U.S.  He married his first wife in 1983.  They had a 
son in 1985. He came to the United States in March 1986 to pursue his graduate 
studies with the intent of returning to China after receiving his degree.  This was about 
the time the Tianamen Square massacre occurred and Applicant felt it unsafe to return 
to China.  (Tr. p. 96.)  Applicant left his troubled marriage with his wife and son in China.  
Applicant stayed in the U.S and filed for divorce in China which was final in 1993.  (Tr. 
p. 108.)    
 
 In June 2000, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen.  He met a girl in 
China while visiting his family for two weeks in 2000.  She worked as a travel agent in 
China.  Applicant applied for a fiancé visa and they were married in the U.S. in 2001.   
She is a permanent resident of the U.S.  She plans to apply for her U.S. citizenship next 
 
3 
 
year when she will be eligible to take the foreign language exam for citizenship.  They 
have a daughter who was born in the U.S.  Applicant has lived in the U.S. for the past 
31 years.  In 1998, he purchased a house worth $600,000, which is almost paid off.  He 
has a checking and savings bank accounts and a retirement account.  He has about 
one million dollars in several IRAs and investment retirement account.  (Tr. p. 52.)  His 
total net worth in the U.S. is approximately 1.6 million dollars.  (Tr. p. 53.)  Applicant has 
traveled to China three or four times since moving here in 1986.  (Tr. p. 58.)  He has not 
been back to China since 2003.    
 
 Applicant’s wife has three siblings, two brothers and one sister.  They are all 
either retired or work in a factory.  (Tr. p. 113.)  His wife travels to China every two years 
or so to visit her parents in China.  (Tr. p. 116.)  She also communicates with her friends 
and family in China about once every few months by telephone or some sort of social 
media program.  (Tr. p. 118.)  Applicant’s wife takes their daughter to visit family in 
China when she goes every couple of years.   
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of China.  She is an 84-year-old 
housewife.  Applicant communicates with her about once a year.  She has no internet or 
telephone.  Applicant last spoke to her in 2016 during the Chinese New Year.  His 
mother knows only that he is an Engineer.  (Tr. p. 57.)     
 
 Applicant’s two brothers and two sisters are citizens and residents of China.  His 
older brother is a retired factory worker.  Applicant communicates with this brother about 
once a year, when he talks with his mother.  This brother has no association with the 
Chinese Government.  Applicant’s younger brother is the sole proprietor of a business 
selling U.S. machinery products to China.  (Tr. p. 62.)  He communicates with this 
brother about twice a year.  (Tr. p. 65.)  He only knows that Applicant works as a 
Software Engineer.  Applicant also has one older sister and one younger sister.  His 
older sister is a retired factory worker, with no affiliation with the Chinese government.  
He communicates with her once a year.  Applicant’s younger sister is also a retired 
factory worker.  She has a part-time job working with kindergarten children.  (Tr. p. 68.)  
They communicate about twice a year.  None of his family members have any influence 
over the Applicant.     
 
 Applicant has a mother-in-law and father-in-law who are citizens and residents of 
China.  They are both retired factory workers who are now in their 80’s.  They have no 
affiliation with the Chinese government.  Applicant last communicated with them in 
2013.  They know that Applicant is an Engineer and nothing more.  (Tr. p. 70.)  
Applicant states that they cannot influence or manipulate him to divulge classified 
information.  (Tr. p. 70.)   
 
 Applicant has one son who is a citizen and resident of China.  He and the 
Applicant do not have a close relationship.  Applicant left China to come to the United 
States when his son was six months old.  Applicant did not establish any relationship 
with his son until his son was about 15 years old and in high school.  In 2009, 
Applicant’s son traveled to the U.S. for an internship, and he had lunch with the 
Applicant on one occasion.  Applicant’s son then returned to China.  Applicant has had 
 
4 
 
occasional conversations with his son, about once a year.  (Tr. p. 76.)  In 2014, 
Applicant’s son returned to the U.S. on a student visa.  Since then, Applicant’s son has 
been in the United States pursuing his graduate studies in business management.  
Applicant last saw his son at graduation, in February of this year.  His son has tried to 
reach out to the Applicant, but after receiving the SOR in this matter, Applicant is 
hesitant to respond to his son, for fear that it may jeopardize his security clearance.  (Tr. 
p. 72.)  Applicant communicates with his son on average about three times a year and 
their conversations are limited and casual.  Applicant’s son does not know what 
Applicant does for a living. 
 
 Applicant’s wife receives a retirement payment in the approximate amount of 
$312 monthly from the Chinese government.  She uses it for her travel expenses.  She 
receives the money in a Chinese bank account.  Applicant does not benefit from her 
retirement payment.  Applicant receives nothing from the Chinese government.   
Applicant plans on applying for social security from the U.S. when he is old enough to 
do so.  (Tr. p. 84) 
 
 Two witnesses testified favorably on behalf of the Applicant.  His team lead, who 
has daily contact with the Applicant, stated that Applicant is a hard worker who gets the 
job done.  He is honest, trustworthy, and responsible. His department director testified 
that Applicant is an outstanding, dedicated, loyal employee.  Applicant is said to interact 
well with his teammates and can at all times be trusted.  They both have no 
reservations about the Applicant holding a security clearance.  (Tr. pp. 29-43.)  
 
 Performance Evaluations of the Applicant for years 2014, 2015 and 2016, 
indicate that Applicant either meets or exceeds expectations in every category.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit C.) 
 
 Letters of reference from supervisors, professional associates, and friends 
indicate that Applicant is an integral member of the technical development team.  He is 
said to be highly dependable, valued, and respected.  He is considered to be honest 
and a person of integrity.  Applicant is also said to be competent, hardworking, 
dedicated to the mission, trustworthy, and responsible.  He handles all material strictly 
according to the guidelines.  He is strongly recommended for a security clearance. 
(Applicant’s Exhibit E.) 
 
 Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement dated February 22, 2017, indicates that 
after he pays his regular monthly expenses, he has about $1,905 in dispensable income 
left at the end of the month. (Applicant’s Exhibit H.) 
 
 Applicant’s mortgage statement dated December 1, 2016, reflects that he had an 
unpaid balance on his home loan in the amount of $15,700.75.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts about the People’s 
Republic of China.  China is one of the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators 
of economic espionage, and it is predicated that their attempts to collect U.S. 
intelligence will continue at a high level and will represent a persistent, if not growing 
 
5 
 
threat to U.S. economic security.  China’s intelligence services, as well as private 
companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens, or person with 
family ties to China, who can use their insider access to corporate networks to steal 
secrets using removable media and devices or e-mail.  China is using its cyber 
capabilities to support intelligence collection against the U.S. national diplomatic, 
economic, and defense industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense 
program. China very likely uses its intelligence services and employees other illicit 
approaches that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security 
and export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials 
unobtainable through other means.  In 2015, numerous computer systems around the 
world, including those owned by the U.S. Government, continued to be targeted for 
intrusions, some of which appear to be attributable directly to China’s Government and 
military. These and past intrusions were focused on accessing networks and exfiltrating 
information. China uses state sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase 
the level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, 
development, and acquisition.  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility and access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
6 
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
 
7 
 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
  Applicant’s family members are citizens and residents of China.  The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 Having considered the fact that China presents a heightened risk to the national 
security of the U.S., the nature of the relationships with Applicant’s family in China does 
not pose a security risk.  There is no strong connection with his family in China or the 
country of China for that matter.  No one in his family is associated with the Chinese 
government, nor do they show any interest in the Applicant or his work.  Applicant has 
only limited and casual contact with his extended family in China.  There is nothing 
between he and them that could potentially create a conflict of interest.  Applicant 
resides with his spouse and daughter.   His spouse is a permanent resident of the U.S., 
who plans to apply for her American citizenship next year when she is eligible to take 
the exam in her native language.  Their daughter is an American citizen. Applicant’s 
older son, who was born in China, recently moved to the U.S. to attend graduate school 
and is now in a business training program here.    Applicant’s relationship with his son is 
distant and seems troubled, but is not a risk to the U.S.  Applicant has a deep and long- 
standing relationship and loyalty to the U.S. He has established his life here, his assets 
are here, and his immediate family is here.  Based upon this history, he will always 
 
8 
 
resolve any situation in favor of the U.S.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), 
has been established. 
 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s connections with China do not pose a risk to the U.S. government.  
Applicant clearly understands the responsibilities required of him in holding a security 
clearance.  He has obviously shown the maturity and level of judgment required to 
access classified information as evidenced by his longstanding commitment to the U.S.  
In the event that Applicant breaches this trust, his security clearance will be in 
immediate jeopardy.     
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
