 
1 
                                         
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
        )  ISCR Case No. 16-01898 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided sufficient evidence of resolution of her financial issues. Her 
husband’s unemployment and a change in her own employment were the primary causes 
of her financial problems. She rehabilitated her student loans, which constituted about 
two thirds of the $33,318 debt alleged in her statement of reasons (SOR). She disputed 
several debts, paid four debts, and plans to pay her verified debts through a debt-
consolidation plan. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 11, 2015, Applicant signed her Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 2. On July 30, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR 
to her, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Item 1. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
On August 26, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she did not 
request a hearing. Item 1. On October 6, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File 
 
2 
                                         
 
of Relevant Material (FORM). On October 11, 2016, Applicant received the FORM, and 
she did not respond to the FORM. On October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to me. 
The case file consists of five exhibits. Items 1-5. Applicant did not object to any of the 
Government exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.g, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, 1.p through 1.s, 1.w, 1.x, 1.z, and 1.bb. Item 1. She also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Item 1. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 39 years old, and she has been employed as a corporate human 
resources manager since April 2013.3 From June 2002 to March 2013, she worked as a 
business manager for federal contractors. In 1997, she graduated from high school. Item 
3. In 2014, she received a bachelor’s degree in business administration. She has no prior 
military service. In 2011, she married, and her seven children and stepchildren were born 
in 1994, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 2010, and 2014. There is no evidence of violations of 
her employer’s rules, alcohol abuse, or illegal drug use. 
 
Financial Considerations4 
 
 When Applicant’s employment contract ended, she moved to a different state 
where she had an employment offer. Her new employment was in a location with a higher 
cost of living; however, she did not receive a pay increase. Her husband was unemployed. 
Her home was foreclosed; her vehicle was voluntarily repossessed; and other debts 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s February 11, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA) is the source for the facts in this paragraph. Item 
2. 
 
4 Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this section is Applicant’s SOR response. Item 
1.  
 
3 
                                         
 
became delinquent. She recently received a pay increase, and she is able to make 
progress resolving her delinquent debts.  
  
Applicant’s SOR lists 28 alleged debts totaling $33,318, and their status is as 
follows:  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.c through 1.f allege Applicant has five delinquent student loans 
owed to the same student-loan creditor for $6,100, $4,444, $3,537, $3,483, and $2,857. 
Applicant said she believed her student loans were in deferment, and she was unaware 
that they were delinquent. The rules on deferment and forbearance are complicated and 
eligibility changes as personal circumstances change. She began making payments on 
her student loans before she received the SOR. On August 9, 2016, the student-loan 
creditor wrote that Applicant completed her student loan rehabilitation program, and her 
new monthly payment is $213. Applicant’s budget indicates her total student loan debt is 
about $70,000.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant has a charged-off debt for $4,877. Applicant said she 
believed her debt was resolved when her vehicle was repossessed in August 2013. Item 
3. She asked for a copy of the loan agreement; however, the creditor did not provide it. 
Item 2. She disputed the amount of the debt. Item 3. She contacted the creditor twice and 
offered to make payments; however, the creditor rejected her offers, stating the debt was 
charged off.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges Applicant has a debt placed for collection for $843. Applicant 
said this debt is being paid through a debt-consolidation plan. The credit reporting 
company acknowledged receipt of Applicant’s dispute of this account.     
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.m, 1.p through 1.z allege Applicant owes 15 medical debts 
placed for collection totaling $4,486 for $721, $524, $350, $138, $54, $151, $134, $64, 
$411, $721, $524, $199, $149, $210, and $136. The SOR debts in ¶ 1.h and ¶ 1.u are  
both for $721, and ¶ 1.i and ¶ 1.v are both for $524. She is credited with resolving the 
SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.u and 1.v as duplications. She did not recognize the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.h, 1.i, 1.t, 1.u, 1.y, and 1.v, and she has disputed them. The credit reporting companies 
have acknowledged receipt of disputes for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.v, and 1.u. Most 
of the medical debts resulted from treatment of her children. Item 3. She believed her 
medical insurance would take care of the debts. Item 3. Applicant said the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.k, 1.p through 1.s, 1.w, 1.x, and 1.z are being paid through a debt-consolidation plan. 
She said she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m.     
 
SOR ¶ 1.j and 1.l allege Applicant owes two telecommunications debts placed for 
collection for $371 and $210. Applicant said the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j is being paid through a 
debt-consolidation plan. She is disputing her responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.bb allege Applicant owes two debts for utilities placed for 
collection for $121 and $1,331. Applicant said she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n. Applicant 
said the debt in SOR ¶ 1.bb is being paid through a debt-consolidation plan. 
 
 
4 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.o alleges Applicant owes a state tax lien entered in 2008 for $562. 
Applicant said that this debt was paid, and the creditor is providing proof of resolution to 
her.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.aa alleges Applicant owes a book club debt placed for collection for $97. 
Applicant disputed her responsibility for this debt.  
 
Applicant said after debts are verified, she intends to pay them. Item 3. On August 
20, 2016, Applicant’s credit repair company wrote her and stated nine negative financial 
entries were removed from her credit report, including the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l. 
Applicant employed a credit counseling service to assist with her finances. She generated 
a budget and assembled a plan to address her delinquent debts. Her monthly income is 
$5,600, and her three largest monthly payments are rent of $1,400, health insurance of 
$575, and car payment of $551. She plans to pay $286 monthly into a debt management 
plan and to pay $213 monthly to address her student loans. She has a monthly remainder 
of about $200. Her budget did not include her spouse’s income and expenses. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
 
5 
                                         
 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
 
6 
                                         
 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes four disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability 
of mitigating conditions. 
 
Seven financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,5 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;6 and 
                                            
5 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
7 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 Applicant provided important mitigating information. She lost her employment and 
needed to transfer to a different state, and her husband was unemployed. These are 
circumstances partially or fully beyond her control that harmed her finances.   
 
Applicant paid three SOR debts and brought her student loans to current status. 
Of her total SOR debt of $33,318, Applicant rehabilitated five delinquent student loans 
totaling $20,420, which are owed to the same student-loan creditor. She began making 
payments on her student loans before she received the SOR. Two medical debts were 
duplications. Applicant disputed several debts. AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply.  
                                            
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
Applicant said she paid her $562 state tax debt in SOR ¶ 1.o. AG ¶ 20(g) applies 
to her state tax debt. 
  
Based on Applicant’s track record of paying or resolving her debts, future new 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” Her payments to address her debts showed 
good faith. She has sufficient income to keep her debts in current status and to continue 
making progress paying her remaining debts. Applicant assures she will conscientiously 
endeavor to maintain her financial responsibility. Her efforts are sufficient to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 39 years old, and she has been employed as a corporate human 
resources manager since April 2013. From June 2002 to March 2013, she worked as a 
business manager for federal contractors. In 2014, she received a bachelor’s degree in 
business administration. In 2011, she married, and she has seven children and 
stepchildren. There is no evidence of violations of her employer’s rules, alcohol abuse, or 
illegal drug use. 
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence of resolution of her financial issues. Her 
husband’s unemployment and a change in her own employment were the primary causes 
of her financial problems. She rehabilitated her student loans, which constituted about 
two thirds of the $33,318 debt alleged in her SOR. She disputed several debts, paid four 
debts, and plans to pay her verified debts through a debt-consolidation plan.  
 
 
9 
                                         
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). She understands what she needs to do to establish and 
maintain her financial responsibility. She took reasonable actions under her particular 
financial circumstances to address her delinquent debts. Applicant has established a 
“meaningful track record” of debt repayment, and she assures she will maintain her 
financial responsibility.7 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
  
                                            
7 Failure to comply with payment plans or other delinquent debt will raise a security concern. The 
Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. The 
Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, investigation, 
and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from subsequently revoking 
it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security significance of past conduct or 
circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-
06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). An administrative judge does not have “authority to grant an interim, 
conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 
18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security 
clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works on her financial 
problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance is 
conditional. 
 
10 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.bb:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
