 
1 
 
                                                                  
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-02854 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 25, 2016. 
On November 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006 (2006 AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2016, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. On February 9, 2017, the Government submitted its 
written case and, on February 10, 2017, sent a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 5. He 
was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on February 21, 2017, and 
did not respond. Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2017. 
 
2 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the FORM was completed. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 55, married his third wife in April 2003. He has three adult 
children. Applicant’s highest level of education is the ninth grade. He has been 
employed full time as a janitor since October 2015. Prior to that, he worked primarily as 
a welder from 2000 through 2015, except for two months in 2014 and four months in 
2015, when he was unemployed following layoffs.  
 
 Applicant has five delinquent accounts, totaling approximately $9,108, that were 
either charged off or placed for collections.4 When confronted about them during his 
March 2016 subject interview, he claimed awareness of only one: a motorcycle loan that 
he could no longer afford after a layoff (SOR ¶ 1.a). Otherwise, despite acknowledging 
that he had “financial issues” stemming from “an unstable work history,” he claimed no 
knowledge of any other delinquent debts. He claimed that, because he did not read or 
write, his wife handled their finances. He promised to investigate the accounts and work 
with his creditors to resolve them.  
 
 In his November 2016 SOR answer, Applicant admitted each of the debts alleged 
in the SOR. He attributed three of them to his layoffs (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c.) and, 
without providing corroborating documentation, claimed to have resolved one other 
(SOR 1.e). The record is silent as to what, if any, efforts, Applicant made since March 
2016 to address his delinquent debts, or whether he has any plan to resolve them. The 
record is also silent as to how the layoffs impacted his ability to meet his financial 
obligations, his current ability to repay delinquent debts, or the reasons that they have 
persisted since October 2015. He has not received any financial counseling.  
 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 1), his SCA (Item 3), and the summary of his March 2016 subject interview 
(Item 5). Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection to Item 5, 
I will consider only those facts in Item 5 that are not adverse to Applicant, unless they are contained in 
other evidence or based upon his admissions in the SOR answer. 
 
4 See also GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
In the FORM, the Government argued that Applicant had not provided sufficient 
documentary evidence to demonstrate mitigation, and advised him of the opportunity to 
do so in his response to the FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”5 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”6 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”7 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”8 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.9 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
                                                          
5 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
6 Egan at 527. 
 
7 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
8 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
4 
 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”10 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.11 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.12 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.13 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”14 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”15 
 
Analysis 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.16  
 
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
12 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
15 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit report establish two disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline.17 He has not provided evidence to support any of the potentially 
applicable mitigating factors.18 Therefore, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his failure to pay delinquent debts. In reaching this decision, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d).19 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
  
18 AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances); AG ¶ 20(c) (the individual has 
received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such 
as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control); and AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). 
 
19 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
