 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02779 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information about her efforts and intentions to 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 12, 2016, and requested a decision 
on the administrative record, in lieu of a hearing. On December 12, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant received the FORM on December 
 
2 
 
15, 2016. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and did 
not object to the Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 2) are 
the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
These AGs apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017, and they 
supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the SOR.1 Any changes resulting from 
the issuance of new Adjudicative Guidelines did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h and SOR ¶¶ 1.j-1.l. She denied SOR ¶ 1.i. 
She provided a narrative explanation, but no documents. Her admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Married since 2008, 
she and her husband have two children, ages four and eight. She graduated from 
college in 2007, and earned a master’s degree and teaching certificate in 2009. From 
2009 to 2014, she held a variety of jobs in the fields of childcare and education. She left 
her last such position in June 2014, when she moved with her family to a new state. 
(Item 4) 
 
 Applicant was then unemployed until October 2014, when she was hired for her 
current position as an administrative assistant for a defense contractor. She submitted a 
security clearance application in February 2015. She has never held a security 
clearance.  
 
 The SOR concerns 12 delinquent debts, totaling $94,740. The bulk of her debts 
($84,737) are past-due student loans: SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($40,611), 1.b (a federal loan for 
$39,964), and 1.c ($4,162). SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e and 1.f are past-due medical accounts, 
totaling $868. SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($1,587) and 1.h ($1,323) are debts in collection to the same 
creditor. SOR ¶ 1.i is a judgment to a bank for $1,027. SOR ¶ 1.j is a medical $234 debt 
in collection. SOR ¶ 1.k is a $4,242 past-due debt to a state university. SOR ¶ 1.l is a 
$722 debt that is in collection to a credit union. 
 
 The SOR debts are listed on Applicant’s credit reports from June 2016 and 
February 2015. In addition, an interrogatory response from Applicant (Item 6) includes 
another June 2016 credit report.2  
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
2 SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f are found on Item 4. SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g through 1.l are found on 
Item 5. The credit report that is part of Item 6 also lists SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d and 1.e. 
 
 
3 
 
 With her interrogatory response, Applicant also included a personal financial 
statement. She indicated that she and her husband have a combined monthly net 
income of about $4,843. She estimated that they have monthly expenses of about 
$4,057. Listed debts included a $25,000 car (and a $700 car payment) and student 
loans totaling $68,577. She did not indicate that she was making any payments on her 
student loans. (Item 6) 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR debts but for ¶ 1.i. For that debt, she asserted 
that the bank told her that account had been closed. Applicant provided no documents 
with her answer to the SOR concerning any debt alleged. She only provided a narrative 
explanation of her financial circumstances.  
 
 Applicant indicated that she had no available paperwork or documentation to 
submit because of several moves. Her non-education debt was incurred many years 
ago when she and her husband were not making enough money to make ends meet. 
She attempted to go into forbearance on her student loans but could not keep up with 
the payments. She believed that her parents were paying on some of her student loans, 
but she later learned they were only paying one of them. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant indicated that she pursued financial counseling through her husband’s 
job. She indicated that she took a specific financial counseling class and indicated that 
their “spending has changed dramatically.” She and her husband no longer spend 
beyond their means. (Item 2). Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so there is no 
more recent information available about her current finances, any debt payments, or 
how she intends to address her debts going forward.  
 
Policies 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.”  
 
Under ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .   
 
The guideline sets forth several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent student loans and other unresolved debts. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
5 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence that any of the mitigating AGs 
should apply. She did not assert that her financial delinquencies were due to a 
circumstance beyond her control. She stated only that her non-education debts are 
several years old, and occurred at a time when she and her husband were not able to 
make ends meet.  
 
 Applicant indicated that she participated in financial counseling and that it had a 
positive effect on the family’s spending. However, she did not provide sufficient 
evidence that her finances have improved so as to indicate that her debts are being 
resolved or are under control. She provided no documentation to indicate that she 
“initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve” her debts. Her debts are ongoing. She did not establish that they occurred 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, or that they do not continue to cast doubt 
on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 Of particular concern is Applicant’s student loan debt (both federal and private) 
which remains both significant and delinquent. Applicant did not set forth a reasonable 
plan for resolving these debts, or the others in the SOR. Nor has she shown that she 
has taken any steps towards implementing such a plan, by establishing payment 
agreements with her creditors, and then following up on them. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20 
(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence that she has a reasonable plan to repay her significant delinquent debts. 
Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no 
opportunity to evaluate her credibility based on demeanor.3 Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
