 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03120 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F. On 
January 13, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on February 28, 2017. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 15, 2017. He 
was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information within the 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
30-day period.1 On October 1, 2017, the case was assigned to another administrative 
judge, and on October 16, 2017, the case was reassigned to me. The Government 
exhibits, Items 1 through 6, included in the FORM are admitted in evidence. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to read: “You are indebted to 
[creditor] on a mortgage account that is past due in the approximate amount of 
$107,254.00, with a total loan balance of $296,391.00. As of the date of this Statement 
of Reasons, the mortgage account remains delinquent.” Without objection from the 
Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, 1.e through 1.h, and 1.j through 1.q, 
with explanations; and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i, with explanations. His admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old crew chief employed by a defense contractor since 
October 2015. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his current 
employment. He held previous security clearances while he was on active duty in the 
U.S. Air Force, discussed below.   
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1995. He took college level 
courses while stationed overseas from June 2012 to December 2012. Applicant served 
in the Air Force from December 1995 to December 2015, and was honorably 
discharged. He married in August 1997 and that marriage ended by divorce in January 
2002. He has two adult children from that marriage. Applicant remarried in August 2002, 
and has three children and two stepchildren. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts consisting of a mortgage and 16 
consumer accounts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – l.q) These allegations are established through 
Applicant’s admissions, in part, and the Government’s exhibits. (Items 2 – 6) 
 
 During his March 16, 2016 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Personal 
Subject Interview (PSI), Applicant stated that he experienced financial issues “over the 
past several years.” He explained that his wife lost an $80,000 a year job after he 
received permanent change of station (PCS) orders and because of that income 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s post-FORM submission was marked as Item 7, and admitted in evidence. 
 
2 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
shortfall, they were unable to remain current on their bills.  (Items 2, 6) As noted, 
Applicant denied all but two of his SOR debts stating that they were paid or otherwise 
resolved. (Item 2) In his SOR answer, Applicant claimed that he had resolved 15 of his 
debts, was attempting to resolve one of his debts, and was disputing one of his debts. 
He stated that he was able pay these debts after receiving a loan from his mother. 
However, he only provided documentation shoring resolution for two of his SOR debts. 
(Item 2) 
 
In her FORM, Department Counsel discussed the documentation shortcomings 
of Applicant’s SOR answer noting that he had provided documentation for only two of 
his SOR debts. Upon receipt of Department Counsel’s FORM, Applicant provided 
documentation that addressed or clarified these shortcomings for all but one debt. (Item 
7) That debt is Applicant’s past-due mortgage account for $107,254 with a total loan 
balance of $296,391. (SOR ¶ 1.a)  
 
The mortgage account debt arose when Applicant received PCS orders and was 
required to vacate the home he and his wife lived in from May 2008 to March 2012. 
(Items 3, 6) Applicant purchased the home for $310,000 on a 30-year mortgage with 
monthly payments of $2,600. He made timely payments until 2012 or 2013, exact date 
not recalled, following his PCS transfer. Applicant unsuccessfully tried to refinance his 
mortgage and to sell his house by short sale. The housing crisis no doubt contributed to 
Applicant’s unsuccessful attempts in this regard. (Item 6) He is currently consulting with 
an attorney “to find out what can be done with this debt.” (Item 2) 
 
Applicant recognizes the adverse effects financial irresponsibility can have on 
maintaining his clearance and sustaining his employment. He stated, “I know that my 
debt does not look good at all. I served 20 years faithfully in the Air Force and was 
blessed to retire. I was blessed to receive the current job I hold after I retired. I ask to 
please take into consideration that although my debt looks bad, I am working to get it 
fixed.” (Item 2) In his spare time, Applicant enjoys outdoor activities such as fishing and 
camping and going to the movies and playing video games. (Item 6) 
  
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” The Government established disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because 
the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his behavior does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement.   
 
Partial application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. A byproduct of military service is 
PCS transfers and relocating. Although Applicant surely was aware of this, he could not 
have anticipated the difficulties he would encounter when trying to refinance and short 
sell his home on the heels of the housing crisis. AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and 
20(d) is fully applicable. Although Applicant did not receive financial counseling, all but 
one of his 17 debts are paid or resolved, and there are clear indications that his 
mortgage is being resolved.3 AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                                          
3 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s Air Force service and employment with a 
defense contractor weighs in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive 
member of society. He recognizes the importance of maintaining financial responsibility 
and to that end has made a substantial effort to see to it that his SOR debts are 
resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the 
whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) 
(internal citations omitted). 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will resolve his remaining mortgage 
debt and maintain his financial responsibility.4  
                                                          
4 Failure to comply with payment plans or other delinquent debt will raise a security concern. The 
Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. The 
Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, investigation, 
and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from subsequently 
revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security significance of past 
conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security significance.” ISCR 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this decision to grant Applicant’s security 
clearance is conditional. 
