 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-03568 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 1, 
2015. On December 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006 (2006 
AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 6, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. On March 17, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case and sent a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 6. She was 
given an opportunity to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, 
rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation to the Government’s evidence. She 
received the FORM on March 22, 2017, and timely submitted her response, to which 
 
2 
 
the Government did not object. Items 1 and 2 contain the pleadings in the case. Items 3 
through 6 are admitted into evidence. I admitted the attachments to Applicant’s SOR 
answer into evidence, collectively, as Applicant Exhibit (AX) A, and Applicant’s FORM 
response as AX B. The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2017. 
 
On October 16, 2017, I emailed the parties to reopen the record in order to afford 
Applicant the opportunity to provide an updated FORM response. That email has been 
marked as Appellate Exhibit (APX) I. Applicant timely submitted a response that I 
admitted into evidence, without objection, as AX C.  
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the FORM was completed. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
The Government amended the original SOR to withdraw the Guideline E 
allegation in its entirety. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 48, was divorced three times before marrying her current spouse 
on a date not specified in the record. She has an adult son and a 16-year-old son.  She 
received her bachelor’s degree in 2008 and master’s degree in 2010. Applicant’s 
employment with a defense contractor has been pending final adjudication of her first 
application for a security clearance since August 2015. 
 
The SOR alleged 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately $53,469, consisting 
primarily of student-loan debt. She resolved two debts: SOR 1.g (charged-off 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2), her SCA (Item 3), and the summary of her 2015 and 2016 subject 
interviews (Item 6). I considered that Item 6 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. 
However, Applicant was informed by Department Counsel that she was entitled to make corrections, 
additions, deletions, and updates to Item 6. Applicant was also informed that she was entitled to object to 
consideration of Item 6 on the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant did neither in her response 
to the FORM. Therefore, I conclude that she has waived any objection to Item 6. 
 
 
 
3 
 
account/$114) and 1.k. (charged-off account/$214).4 Two debts were duplicates of other 
SOR debt: SOR ¶ 1.i (duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.d) and SOR ¶ 1.l (duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.f).5 
Two student-loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.j) were current and in “repayment status” 
before the SOR was issued.6 
 
Once Applicant became aware that her federal student-loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e) were delinquent, she took immediate action to rehabilitate them. 
The terms of the rehabilitation program required that she make timely payments for nine 
months, which she arranged via automatic deduction from her bank account, beginning 
November 2015. In December 2016, she learned that those automatic deductions 
stopped after only six months, in April 2016, due to an inadvertent error. She 
immediately took action to reinstate her rehabilitation program.7 As of October 2017, 
these accounts were in good standing.8  
 
Applicant attributed her delinquent debts to the financial mismanagement of her 
third husband, of which she became aware during the course of their divorce. She also 
experienced a 19-month period of unemployment. However, the record does not contain 
sufficient details about the specific impact that each of these circumstances had on the 
accumulation of the SOR debt, or the extent to which other circumstances may also 
have contributed. The record is also silent as to whether she has sought out or received 
any financial counseling. The most recent credit report in the record reveals no new 
delinquent accounts.9 Applicant’s work performance and character are highly regarded 
by her colleagues.10  
  
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”11 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”12 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
                                                          
4 AX A at 16; AX B at 3-4.  
 
5 GE 4 at 2; GE 5 at 4 and 5. 
 
6 See also AE A at 14-15. 
 
7 See also AE A at 1-13. 
 
8 AX C. 
 
9 GE 4. 
 
10 AX B at 5-10. 
 
11 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
12 Egan at 527. 
 
 
4 
 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”13 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”14 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.15 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”16 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.17 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.18 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.19 
                                                          
13 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
14 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
15 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
18 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”20 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debt) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
                                                          
20 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Due to the lack of details in the record, I am unable to conclude that Applicant’s 
debts were caused largely by circumstances beyond her control. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (b) 
is not established. 
 
Applicant took action well before the issuance of the SOR to resolve her student-
loan debts. She has established a meaningful track record of regular and timely 
payments to both of her student-loan account creditors. While Applicant is not currently 
debt-free, her actions, both before and after the SOR was issued, demonstrate that she 
will follow through with repaying her remaining delinquent debts. She is currently 
managing her finances responsibly. I have no doubt about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment in light of the responsible manner in which she 
addressed her delinquent debts. Applicant’s finances are under control. I conclude that 
AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (c), and (d) are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security 
 
7 
 
concerns raised by her financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the amended SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
