 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 16-03092 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has numerous unresolved delinquent debts, including student loans. 
Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. National security eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
Although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG, my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On November 11, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On February 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 28, 2017, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing, scheduling the hearing for May 18, 2017. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. All exhibits were admitted into evidence.2 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 24, 2017. The record remained open until 
June 16, 2017, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. He timely 
submitted documents, which I marked as AE D and AE E, and admitted into evidence 
without an objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and unmarried. He earned an associate’s degree in 2007. 
He attended college between 2008 and 2010, and worked on a bachelor’s degree. He 
enlisted in the Navy in 2010 and obtained a secret security clearance. He was medically 
discharged in 2011. He worked until 2012, when his mother fell ill. He cared for her for 
several months and then took a job in the security field. He worked in that field from 2013 
to 2014, and then at another position until 2015. He was unemployed from 2015 until he 
obtained his current employment in September 2016. (Tr. 16-22.)  
 
 Applicant’s net monthly salary is $1,300. After paying expenses and food costs, he 
said he does not have any money remaining. He does not have a written budget. (Tr. 24-
25.) He took an online credit counseling course the day before this hearing. (AE 16.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from January 2017, January 2016, and 
December 2010, the SOR alleged 19 delinquent debts. They consist of 12 student loans 
that Applicant obtained between 2005 and 2009, and 7 consumer debts that became 
delinquent between 2013 and 2015. The alleged debts total over $63,000. (GE 4, GE 5, 
GE 7.)  
 
 The delinquent student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c total $23,939 and 
are unresolved. He contacted the creditors in December 2016 to establish a payment 
plan, but could not afford an initial payment of $4,000 to start a plan. He has never made 
a payment on these student loans. (Tr. 26, 28-30; AE A.) These debts are unresolved. 
 
 The delinquent student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.l total $24,527. They 
were consolidated in January 2017 and placed in deferment until January 2018. Applicant 
has never made a payment on the debts. (Tr. 30-32; AE A, AE B.) These debts are in a 
non-delinquent status at this time. 
 
                                                 
2 Applicant made some minor corrections to his personal interview. (GE 2.) Those changes are referenced 
in the transcript and on the exhibit. (Tr. 12 through 19.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The $5,526 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m is owed to an apartment complex 
for a lease Applicant co-signed for his sister in 2013. He learned she defaulted on the 
lease in 2015. He hired a lawyer in March 2016 to help him resolve it. (Tr. 32-33.) It 
remains unresolved. 
  
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n through 1.s are unresolved. Applicant said he is 
disputing them because he does not believe they are his debts. In August 2016, he hired 
a company to repair his credit. He said the company filed disputes for these debts. He did 
not provide documentation confirming the basis of the disputes or resolution for any of 
them. (Tr. 36-37, 42.) These debts are unresolved.  
 
 Applicant said he timely filed his 2014 and 2015 Federal tax returns. (Tr. 38.) He 
submitted copies of them, which noted a date of preparation as February 2016 and 
indicated that his 2013 return was filed late. (AE D, AE E.) He has not filed his 2016 
Federal tax return because he has not “gotten around to it yet.” (Tr. 39.) He believes the 
Internal Revenue Service requires an individual to file a return every three years and not 
every year.3 (Tr. 39.)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
                                                 
3 The SOR did not allege that Applicant failed to timely file his 2014 or 2016 Federal income tax returns. 
That derogatory information will not be considered in analyzing the disqualifying conditions, but may be 
considered in the analysis of mitigating conditions and the whole-person, and in evaluating his credibility.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E 3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865: “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Three of them 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Between 2006 and 2015, Applicant accumulated delinquent student loans and 
other debts that he has been unable or unwilling to resolve. The evidence raises the 
above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue 
 
 Ten of the alleged 19 delinquent debts are ongoing, unresolved, and continue to 
cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. Although Applicant did 
not specifically assert that his delinquent debts arose as a consequence of periods of 
unemployment, the evidence indicates that his mother’s illness and those periods may 
have contributed to his inability to pay his debts. Those were circumstances beyond 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s control. However, there is insufficient evidence to establish full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(b) because Applicant did not document actions he took to responsibly 
manage his obligations.  
 
 The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). A day before the 
hearing, Applicant took an online financial counseling course, the substance of which is 
unknown. He provided insufficient evidence to indicate that his SOR-alleged debts are 
under control. In January 2017, Applicant consolidated nine student loans, which were 
then placed in deferment. Those very recent actions do not demonstrate a good-faith 
effort to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.l, which had been delinquent 
for a long time. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
  In August 2016, Applicant hired a firm to dispute the alleged debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.n 
through 1.s. None of these debts are resolved, nor is there evidence that he has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 30-year-old man, 
who is responsible for his financial decisions. To-date, he has not demonstrated a history 
of managing delinquent debts and student loans, nor a plan to resolve them. He failed to 
file his 2016 Federal tax return, or express a sense of duty and immediacy to comply with 
this legal obligation. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He failed 
to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                AGAINST APPLICANT 
                 
                          Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.s:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
                                                  
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
