 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03104 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient documented evidence that he made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent debts, which occurred after a job loss and a reduction in 
income. He mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 21, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He submitted one document with his 
answer. It is marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into evidence without 
objection. On January 19, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM), including documents identified as Items 1 through 5. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 30, 2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit a 
response, and did not object to the Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer 
(Items 1 & 2) are the pleadings in the case. Items 3, 4 and 5 are admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
 When Applicant answered the SOR, he indicated that several of the SOR debts 
had been paid, and provided contact and account information for the creditors. I e-mailed 
the parties on October 5, 2017, and reopened the record to allow Applicant the opportunity 
to document and update his answers.1 On October 11, 2017, Applicant submitted an e-
mail response (AE B) and 10 documents, which are marked as AE C through AE L and 
admitted without objection.  
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs are effective June 8, 2017, for all 
decisions after that date, including this one, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant 
received with the SOR.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i, with explanations. I have incorporated 
his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He graduated from high school in 1990. He and his wife 
have been married since 2005, and they have a nine-year-old daughter. From 2004 to 
December 2007, Applicant worked as a manager, until his employer went out of business. 
He was then unemployed for about three months before finding part-time work as a self-
employed network engineer. He worked in that position from April 2008 to December 
2011, when the location where he was working closed. In 2012, he worked in fundraising 
for a local school. He was unemployed from November 2012 to November 2013. (Item 3) 
 
 Since November 2013, Applicant has worked for his current employer, in the 
defense industry. In connection with his employment, he submitted a security clearance 
application (SCA) in January 2016. He disclosed several delinquent debts, including 
credit cards and a repossessed car. He has never held a clearance. (Item 3; AE L) 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
2 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In the SOR, the Government alleged nine delinquent debts, totaling about $14,358. 
They are listed on Applicant’s February 2016 credit report. In his April 2016 background 
interview and in his answer, Applicant indicated that he fell behind on his debts after he 
lost his job in 2008, and was only able to find part time work, resulting in a reduction in 
income. Applicant indicated that since he has been working full time in his current job, he 
has been able to pay off most of his debts. (Answer, Items 4, 5; AE B) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($5,024) is a judgment filed against Applicant in 2011, relating to credit 
card debt. Applicant disclosed the account on his SCA. Applicant indicated that he is in 
contact with the creditor, and is negotiating to settle the account, though he disputes the 
amount owed. He indicates that he has the means to pay the judgment once an 
agreement is made. (AE B, AE C) 
  
SOR ¶ 1.b ($3,619) is a judgment filed against Applicant in 2009, relating to credit 
card debt. He disclosed the debt on his SCA. Applicant provided documentation with his 
answer that he had settled the account and begun making payments. (AE A) More 
recently, he provided documentation that in June 2017, the account was paid in full and 
the judgment satisfied. (AE C) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($4,648) is a charged-off account relating to a repossessed vehicle. 
Applicant disclosed the debt on his SCA. He provided documentation that he settled the 
account. (AE D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is an auto account listed as having been charged off in 2009, and 
transferred to another lender. No amount is listed (or alleged) as delinquent. (Item 5 at 
4). Though Applicant admitted ¶ 1.d, he noted that the debt had been paid in full, the title 
released, and the vehicle sold. With no amount alleged as delinquent (or owed), the 
account is resolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($396) and 1.f ($315) are past-due medical debts. Both were paid in 
January 2017 (AE E, AE F) SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($215), 1.h ($99 phone bill) and 1.i ($42 cable 
bill) were also paid in January 2017. (AE G, AE H, AE I) 
 
Applicant provided documentation indicating that he earned about $37,000 in 
2015, and about $51,000 in 2016 in taxable income. His current taxable income appears 
slightly higher. (AE K) He and his wife have about $70,000 in documented assets. (AE J) 
They live modestly, and rent free, in a basement apartment in his father’s house. (Item 3) 
   
Policies 
 
 As the Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, it is well 
established that no one has a right to a security clearance.3 The Egan court also held that 
                                                          
3 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
4 
 
 
“the clearly consistent standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.”4 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
                                                          
4 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.5 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable: ¶¶ 19 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 19 (c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accrued multiple financial delinquencies after he lost his full-time job in 
2008. He then worked part-time, and was unemployed again for all of 2013. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.d, but no delinquency was 
alleged, so that account is not proven as an ongoing debt. 
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s debts were due to a 2008 job loss and a resulting reduction in income. 
A later job loss, in 2013, further impacted his finances. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. For full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must establish that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Since regaining full-time employment with an 
increase in salary, Applicant has resolved almost all of his debts, and intends to continue 
doing so. Applicant has acted responsibly in resolving his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) fully applies.  
 
 Likewise, he established a significant track record of steady payments or other 
evidence of financial stability to show that he “initiated and is adhering to a good-faith 
                                                          
5 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” as required under AG ¶ 
20(d). 
 
 Applicant has sufficient income and assets to show that his financial issues are 
unlikely to recur. He acted responsibly in resolving them, and established that his debts 
no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant provided sufficient documented 
information that he has resolved his debts in a good-faith, responsible manner. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.i:   For Applicant 
   
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
