 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-01297 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 On July 21, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the 
record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 12, 
2017. Applicant received the FORM on September 12, 2017. Applicant had 30 days to 
submit a response to the FORM. He timely submitted a Response to the FORM. (Item 
6) On September 18, 2017, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and 
assigned to me on October 2, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is 56 years old and a potential employee of a DOD contractor. He has 
been offered a position contingent upon receiving a security clearance. He currently 
does not have full-time employment, but works for his father’s business on a full-time 
seasonal basis, and part time the rest of the year. He is also a part-time photographer. 
He has held a security clearance in the past with no known compromises. His highest 
level of education is a bachelor’s degree. He is married and has three children, ages 21, 
19, and 15. (Item 2) 
 
On June 28, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (Item 3) A subsequent background investigation revealed 
Applicant had three past-due mortgages and seven debts with an approximate total 
balance of $7,824.  Of that amount, six of the debts were medical accounts totaling 
$549. (Item 4; Item 5)  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations relating to the past-
due mortgages (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c: Item 4 at 6; Item 5 at 1-2), denies the medical 
allegations claiming the medical bills were paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.h, and 1.j: Item 5 at 2-
3, and 10); and admits a $7,275 judgement for a credit card. (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 5 at 10)  
 
 Applicant indicates the medical debts were satisfied before the SOR was issued. 
His other debts were the result of financial hardships caused by his periods of under 
employment, a rental property being destroyed by a tenant, and his wife’s extended 
illness. (Item 1)  
 
 Applicant has worked in the information technology (IT) industry since 1983. In 
2005, he was laid off for three months. He found employment with DOD Contractor 1 
and applied for and received a security clearance.  He worked for DOD Contractor 1 
until early 2008 when he was laid off. He was unemployed six months and found 
employment with DOD Contractor 2 on a nine-month contract as a subcontractor to 
DOD Contractor 3. He was eventually hired as a permanent employee of DOD 
Contractor 3. In the fall of 2012, sequestration forced DOD Contractor 3 to reduce 
staffing and he was laid off again. He was unemployed until June 2013, when he found 
a job with a private company. In April 2016, Applicant was laid off because of company 
downsizing. In June 2016, Applicant was offered a job with DOD Contractor 4 
contingent on Applicant receiving a security clearance. In June 2017, DOD Contractor 4 
rescinded their job offer because they no longer had an available position. DOD 
Contractor 5 immediately offered Applicant a position contingent on Applicant receiving 
a security clearance  and is sponsoring him for a security clearance. (Item 1) 
 
 Between 2005 and the present, Applicant also worked for two family businesses. 
He worked for his father’s business, part-time while employed full-time, and full-time 
when unemployed. He also has his own part-time photography business. He and his 
wife also started a business. The business has not generated any profit. Applicant  
attempted to look for other employment opportunities, but was unsuccessful. (Item 1)  
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 The status of the SOR debts are: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: A mortgage account more than 120 days past due in the amount of 
$7,225: This is Applicant’s primary mortgage account. It remains past due with a larger 
balance. Applicant says that he has had trouble paying the mortgage because of 
reduced income from four periods of unemployment over a 12 year period. Applicant 
was unemployed for parts of 2005, 2008, and 2013, for a total of 18 months. Currently, 
he has not had a full-time position since April 2016.  Applicant and his wife were 
working with the mortgage company to maintain the loan. He states that if he was 
employed full-time, he would be able to pay his mortgage.  In response to the FORM, 
Applicant provided proof that he retained the services of a law firm to assist him with 
obtaining either a loan modification, a repayment plan, or a short sale if the previous two 
options are not successful. Applicant did not feel he was making progress attempting to 
work directly with the lender and opted to obtain representation in order to make 
progress towards this issue. (Item 2; Item 6 at 5, 30-37) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b:  A $166,414 mortgage account that was past due in the amount of 
$61,379.  This is a mortgage for Applicant’s rental property. One of Applicant’s tenants 
severely damaged the house resulting in expensive repairs. The housing collapse in 
2007-2008 also limited Applicant’s options in dealing with this mortgage. The property 
was worth less than owed on the mortgage, and Applicant was unable to rent the 
property over an extended period of time. Applicant and his wife worked with two 
mortgage servicing companies in an attempt to modify the terms of the loan. Neither 
company did a good job negotiating a loan modification. The second company allowed 
the property to be foreclosed and sold at a sheriff’s sale while the loan modification 
application was in progress. The mortgage went to foreclosure. (Item 2; Item 6) 
   
 SOR ¶ 1.c:  A second mortgage on Applicant’s primary residence that was more 
than 120 days past due in the amount of $547, with a total balance of $58,003:  
Applicant was advised not to make payments on this second mortgage while they were 
in the process of modifying their primary mortgage. Applicant believes they are only in 
arrears about $1,000. If they successfully obtain a loan modification or loan repayment 
on their primary mortgage, this loan will automatically be brought up to date and they 
will continue to make payments. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h are medical debts in the amount of $197, $125, 
$80, $28, and $19:  Applicant believed that these medical bills would be covered by his 
medical insurance. The claims were denied and he was not aware that they were 
denied. He did not become aware of these debts until he checked his credit report in 
June 2017.  He paid the debts on June 28, 2017. (Item 1 at 7, 19)              
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i:  $7,275 judgment filed against Applicant in 2011:  Applicant admits 
this debt, but states the actual balance is $5,101.47.  Applicant misunderstood the 
meaning of charged-off accounts. He believed this meant the account was settled.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was not aware that they owed additional money until he received the SOR. He 
believes that there may have been a settlement on the account and contacted the 
creditor to inquire as to whether there was a settlement. If the account is not settled, 
Applicant states he will make payment arrangements when he is financially able to 
make payments. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: $100 medical account: Applicant states this was a dental bill. He paid 
the bill in November 2016. (Item 1 at 8, 22, 24)  
 
 Applicant’s finances were also complicated by his wife’s health issues. (Item 1 at 
12-13)  He and his wife previously sought the help of a credit repair company. They 
withdrew from the agreement after hearing unfavorable press about the company. He 
previously settled four accounts that were not alleged in the SOR. (Item 5 at 3; Item 4 at 
5 -6; Item 3; Item 6)  
    
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
All of the above disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant incurred ten 
delinquent accounts to include two mortgages, a second mortgage, six medical 
accounts, and a credit card account.  
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The concern under Financial Considerations is broader than the possibility that a 
person might knowingly compromise classified information to obtain money or 
something else of value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, 
judgment, and other important qualities.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raised 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
financial counseling service, and there are clear indications the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and   
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) and A.G ¶ 20(b) apply because Applicant’s financial issues occurred 
as a result of his numerous periods of unemployment.  The circumstances were unusual 
and are unlikely to recur when Applicant obtains full-time employment. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies because Applicant’s periods of unemployment were beyond his control.  
Applicant was laid off as a result of company downsizing and as well as the 
sequestration imposed by Congress in 2012.  His wife’s chronic medical problems also 
contributed to the household financial situation. Despite these problems, the Applicant 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. He attempted to work with the lender of 
his rental property to modify the mortgage, but the lender foreclosed on the property in 
the middle of his modification application.  He resolved all of the medical bills.  He did 
not pay the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i because he mistakenly believed that a 
charged-off account meant that the account was resolved. He is attempting to modify 
his primary residence’s mortgage and intends to bring the second mortgage current if 
he is successful. Considering Applicant’s lengthy periods of unemployment, he does not 
have a significant amount of delinquent debt. He acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.h and 1.j.  
Applicant was not aware that he owed these debts, believing they were paid by his 
medical insurance. Once he learned of these debts, he paid the debts in full. He is 
looking into the delinquent credit card account and intends to pay it as soon as he is 
financially capable. He was working in good-faith with the mortgage companies to 
modify the loans for his primary residence and his rental property. Despite the financial 
hardships he has endured, he has worked in good-faith to resolve his delinquent debts. 
I note that he previously resolved four debts that were not alleged in the SOR.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s employment history as an IT professional and his four 
periods of unemployment over the past 12 years. Applicant has continued to look for 
employment, but has been unsuccessful.  He continues to operate a part-time 
photography business and works for his father’s business while he looks for full-time 
employment. His wife’s medical issues have also affected the household finances.  
When looking at his numerous hardships, Applicant has not incurred a significant 
amount of consumer debt, which indicates, that if not for being laid off, he would have 
been able to make his mortgage payments. Applicant has paid what debts he could and 
is attempting to modify the loan on his primary residence. Circumstances beyond his 
control have impacted his ability to pay his mortgages. His financial situation is not 
perfect, but he demonstrated that he is aware of the issues and what steps need to be 
done to work on his delinquent accounts. The security concerns raised under financial 
considerations are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
