 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00282 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and alcohol consumption security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and G (alcohol consumption). Applicant responded to the SOR on May 10, 
2017, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on June 7, 2017. A complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on June 14, 2017. As of July 31, 2017, 
he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 2017. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2005. He is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. He is a high school graduate. He is divorced with an adult child.1 
  
 Applicant has a history of alcohol-related driving offenses. He was arrested and 
charged with driving under the influence (DUI) in 1979, 1989, 1993, 2006, and April 
2016. Several of the arrests, including the arrests in 1989, 2006, and 2016, resulted in 
convictions. The last arrest occurred after he drank around 12 beers over a four-hour 
period, had a 22% blood alcohol concentration (BAC), and drove the wrong way on a 
one-way street. He was sentenced on the last offense in January 2017. He is on 
probation for that offense until January 2018.2  
 
 Applicant wrote that the alcohol-related arrests had never affected his 
professional life. He stated that about every ten years “drinking has caused [him] trouble 
and [he] always dealt with it and did what was necessary to get it taken care of.” He 
assures “that this will not happen again or cause any problem with [his] job performance 
or security.”3 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
February 2016. He reported DUI arrests in 1996, 1999, and 2005. He wrote that he 
estimated the dates. He also wrote in the comments section: “I have missed some of my 
driving records and have a lot of the dates estimated on my traffic offenses.”4 I find that 
Applicant did not intentionally falsify the SF 86 when he failed to report all of his DUI 
arrests. 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in August 2016, which 
was after his last arrest but before his conviction and sentencing. He discussed his 
criminal history up through 2006, which included a few minor offenses that were not 
alleged in the SOR. After discussing the 2006 conviction, he told the investigator that he 
had no other charges, offenses, or arrests. He stated that he no longer drinks and 
drives and has absolutely no future intention to have any alcohol-related issues. He 
stated that he is very careful when drinking to ensure he has a designated driver as he 
does not want any further alcohol arrests or charges. Applicant did not tell the 
investigator that he had been arrested in April 2016 for DUI and was pending charges.5  
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2-6. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant was contacted again by the background investigator in October 2016 
and confronted with the charges from the April 2016 arrest. Applicant stated that he did 
not disclose the arrest during the previous interview because there was a chance the 
charges would be dropped. He stated that he did not realize that he should have 
reported the arrest because it was still pending when the interview occurred.6 I do not 
find that explanation believable. I find that Applicant intended to mislead the investigator 
when he failed to divulge his April 2016 arrest and pending DUI charge. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
6 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
Applicant had five alcohol-related driving arrests. His most recent DUI arrest was 
in April 2016, when he drank around 12 beers over a four-hour period, had a 22% BAC, 
and drove the wrong way on a one-way street. He is still on probation for that offense. 
AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 There is nothing in the record that would substantiate any of the above mitigating 
conditions. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
6 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally falsify the February 2016 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. However, he did intend to mislead the 
investigator when he failed to divulge his April 2016 arrest and pending DUI charge 
during his August 2016 background interview. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable.  
 
Applicant’s multiple DUI arrests and convictions reflect questionable judgment 
and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. They also created 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 
16(c) is not perfectly applicable because Applicant’s conduct is sufficient for an adverse 
determination under the alcohol consumption guideline. However, the general concerns 
about questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are established. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
7 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s conduct was egregious and recent. He cannot be trusted to tell the 
truth, and he is on probation. There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and alcohol consumption security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b-2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
