 
1 
 
                            
 
                                  
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
   
      
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03640 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/04/2019 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 12, 
2016. On November 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
were revised effective June 8, 2017, and apply herein. Applicant answered the SOR on 
January 25, 2018, and requested a hearing. 
 
The case was assigned to me on October 3, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 28, 2019, scheduling the 
 
2 
 
hearing for April 8, 2019. The hearing was convened via video teleconference, as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified. The record was held open to permit Applicant to submit 
documentary evidence in mitigation. Applicant Exhibit (AE) A was submitted, which 
include tax notices and portions of tax returns. AE A was admitted in evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 18, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old trainer, employed by a defense contractor since 2012. 
He graduated from high school in 1979. He was previously married in 1985 and divorced 
in 2013. He has four adult children, but continues to pay child support for one special 
needs child. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 1979 to 1982, and in the 
Army Reserve since 1982. Applicant has held a security clearance for 40 years since first 
entering the Army. In 2007, The Department of the Army warned Applicant about 
delinquent debts when his clearance was renewed. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant is delinquent on five debts totaling over $97,000, and 
he failed to file and pay Federal income taxes for tax year 2016; owes the IRS for income 
taxes due for tax years 2014 to 2016; and has two state tax liens from 2013 and 2015. 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, but explained that his 2016 tax return was filed 
when due, but the taxes were not paid. 
 
Applicant attributes his poor financial status largely to his 2013 divorce. He noted 
that his spouse handled household financial matters including taxes. They purchased a 
home in 1998, and Applicant left the home in 2012 after his spouse left. They agreed to 
list the home for three to six months, but were unable to sell it. Applicant stopped 
payments when he left for a job in another state. A foreclosure action was started in 2017, 
and Applicant is past due about $85,000. He has done nothing to determine the status of 
the debt or to attempt to resolve it. (SOR 1.a) Applicant noted that after the divorce, he 
had difficulty transitioning to single living and paying bills on his own.  
 
Applicant is past due on a loan that he claimed was taken out with his ex-spouse 
for about $1,000. His credit report shows the loan was in his name individually. In 
response to Government interrogatories, Applicant was unaware of the debt. In testimony, 
he claimed that he has a payment agreement with the creditor and paid the loan off, but 
he did not provide evidence of the agreement or evidence that the loan has been paid, 
despite discussing it at the hearing. (SOR 1.b) This debt remains unresolved. 
 
Applicant provided evidence that his 2016 Federal tax return was filed when due, 
but he failed to pay the income tax owed. (SOR 1.c) Applicant admitted that he owed 
Federal taxes for 2014 to 2016, that he did not have the money to pay his taxes on time, 
and that he was slow about contacting the IRS to make payment arrangements. (SOR 
1.d) However, the documentation he provided from the IRS shows he was behind on 
income tax payments for tax years 2012 to 2016, causing him to owe interest, penalties 
or other charges, totaling $23,340. His pay was garnished and in 2016, he contacted the 
 
3 
 
IRS and made an arrangement to repay past-due income taxes. He borrowed money from 
his 401k retirement program and made three sizable lump-sum payments in January and 
February 2017, then paid monthly to June 2017. By July 2017, he reduced his tax liability 
to $7,424, and apparently continued to pay. In March 2019, the IRS applied Applicant’s 
2018 refund ($532) to the remainder of his 2016 tax liability, and paid off the balance. 
Applicant’s tax preparer assisted him in adjusting his income withholding to cover his 
future tax liabilities. This debt is resolved. 
 
Applicant owes state taxes resulting in liens filed in 2013 and 2015, totaling $4,369. 
He has not shown sufficient efforts to resolve these debts and they remain unpaid. (SOR 
1.e and 1.f)  
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling and earns about $92,000 annually. 
He has about $700 net savings per month after paying expenses, and has about $2,000 
in a savings account. In 2018, he paid a state income tax liability from 2015 owed to 
another state, and intends to continue to pay other debts as appropriate according to his 
financial ability. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
 
4 
 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see, AG 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence are sufficient to establish 
the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial status was likely negatively impacted by his divorce, however, 
he admitted to difficulty transitioning to life on his own, and did not adequately take 
responsibility for his own financial obligations. He filed his income tax returns when due, 
but did not pay taxes owed. He completed a payment plan with the IRS to resolve his 
Federal tax obligations, but has not resolved his delinquent state tax obligations. There 
is insufficient evidence that he has attempted to resolve the remaining SOR debts.  
 
The Appeal Board has long held: 
 
Security requirements include consideration of a person’s judgment, 
reliability, and a sense of his or her legal obligations. Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union, Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). Failure to comply with Federal tax laws suggests 
 
6 
 
that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established 
government rules and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and 
regulations is essential for protecting classified information. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
 
Applicant’s lack of financial responsibility with regard to tax obligations and other 
debts show a history of financial difficulties that have not been overcome to date. There 
is no evidence that Applicant has sought financial counseling or assistance with his debts 
except for tax preparation services. He has not shown efforts to contact creditors and 
state tax authorities to resolve debt, despite significant time since the Government first 
showed its concern with his delinquent debts. Overall, based on the record presented, I 
am unable to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control or are unlikely 
to recur. No conditions fully apply to mitigate his delinquent state tax obligations and other 
debts. Applicant is credited with filing his Federal income taxes when due, and he 
satisfactorily resolved his Federal tax obligations through a payment plan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion may 
not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be found 
ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of questionable 
judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s personal 
difficulties do not overcome his history of financial irresponsibility, especially with respect 
to tax obligations, despite his long history of security clearance eligibility and military 
service. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
