 
1 
 
                               
 
                               
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
   
      
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04318 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq. 
 
06/13/2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on November 23, 2018, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 4, 2019, he 
changed his request to a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on March 14, 2019. The hearing was convened as scheduled on May 9, 
2019. Department Counsel amended the SOR at the hearing by withdrawing SOR 
paragraphs 1.c and 1.d. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called seven witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through PP, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Egypt. Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained 
in the request. The facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated 
verbatim in this decision. Applicant submitted additional information about Egypt. (AE X) 
I have also taken administrative notice of facts about Egypt from the U.S. Department of 
State website. Egypt is a republic governed by an elected president and unicameral 
legislature. The United States and Egypt share a strong partnership based on mutual 
interest in Middle East peace and stability, economic opportunity, and regional security. 
Promoting a stable, prosperous Egypt, where the government protects the basic rights 
of its citizens and fulfills the aspirations of the Egyptian people, will continue to be a 
core objective of U.S. policy. I also note the significant threat of terrorism and ongoing 
human rights problems in Egypt. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer or a predecessor company for about 13 years. He is applying for a security 
clearance for the first time. He has a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He is 
married with four children. 
 
 Applicant was born in the United States to Egyptian parents. His father worked 
for the Egyptian government and was assigned to the United States. Applicant returned 
to Egypt with his family when he was about three years old. He grew up and was 
educated in Egypt, but he often visited the United States and always planned to 
eventually move back here. He was hired by a U.S. company after college and worked 
in Egypt until about 2013. His job required him to travel frequently to the United States. 
 
 Applicant’s wife is from Egypt, and they were married in Egypt. Two of their 
children were born in Egypt and two were born in the United States. All of their children 
are U.S. citizens. Applicant moved his family to the United States in 2011. From 2011 to 
2013, he divided his time between Egypt and the United states. He moved permanently 
to the United States in 2013. His wife became a U.S. citizen in 2016. 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. His mother, brother, parents-in-law, and two 
siblings-in-law are citizens and residents of Egypt. His mother is a retired school teacher 
in poor health. His brother works in finance. Applicant’s brother stays with his mother 
and takes care of her. Applicant talks to his mother and brother regularly because he 
wants to check on her. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s parent-in-laws are retired with medical conditions. His siblings-in-law 
work for private companies. Applicant talks to his parents-in-laws about once a month 
when his wife talks to them. He talks to his wife’s siblings less often. 
 
 Applicant owns the apartment in Egypt where he used to live. He estimated its 
value at $40,000. It is for sale. He does not have any other assets in Egypt. Applicant 
owns his house in the United States as well as the house next store, which he rents to a 
tenant. He has about $81,000 in a retirement account. He credibly testified that his 
family and property in Egypt could not be used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing 
classified information, and that he would report any attempt to do so. 
 
Applicant is active in his community. He is a volunteer firefighter who was named 
Volunteer Firefighter of the Year in 2015. He started the process to join the National 
Guard in 2017, but when his wife became pregnant, he decided it would require too 
much time away from a pregnant wife and three young children. Seven witnesses 
testified on his behalf, and he submitted numerous documents and letters attesting to 
his civic involvement, patriotism, honesty, loyalty, strong moral character, and 
outstanding job performance.  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive paragraph E3.1.15, the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG paragraph 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG paragraph 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
5 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
There is a significant threat of terrorism and ongoing human rights problems in 
Egypt. Applicant’s foreign contacts and property create a potential conflict of interest 
and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through his wife. The above disqualifying conditions have 
been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG paragraph 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Egypt. Egypt is a republic governed 
by an elected president and unicameral legislature. The United States and Egypt share 
a strong partnership based on mutual interest in Middle East peace and stability, 
economic opportunity, and regional security. Guideline B is not limited to countries 
hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting 
 
6 
 
and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is 
not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. 
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen. His wife and four children are in the United 
States and are U.S. citizens. He is a valued employee and a dedicated member of his 
community. He was named Volunteer Firefighter of the Year in 2015. With the exception 
of the apartment in Egypt that is for sale, all of his assets are in the United States.  
I find that Applicant’s ties to Egypt are outweighed by his deep and long-standing 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. His closest family, life, home, majority of 
his assets, and professional career are in the United States. I find that it is unlikely he 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United 
States and the interests of Egypt. There is no conflict of interest, because he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. The above 
mitigating conditions are applicable. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG paragraph 2(d):  
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 Under AG paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. I also 
considered Applicant’s strong character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
