 
1 
 
                                
 
                              
                    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
      
        
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04110 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
June 21, 2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 6, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On August 13, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines.   
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on September 4, 2018. (Government 
Exhibit 2.) He requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
November 2, 2018.  A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing five Items, was received by Applicant on November 8, 2018.  He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted a response to 
the FORM within the 30-day period.  DOHA assigned the case to me on May 23, 2019.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He is divorced with three children, ages 13, 18, and 20.  
He has a high school diploma.  He holds the position as automotive painter and is 
employed with a defense contractor.  He is applying for a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.   
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has nine delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$57,579, which include delinquent consumer debts, child support payments and Federal 
taxes that have either been charged off or sent to collections.  Applicant admits each of 
the allegations set forth in the SOR except 1.i., which he claims has been paid.  
Applicant attributes his financial problems to an inability to afford to pay the debts 
incurred during his marriage as well as the perils of divorce.  Applicant lost 50/50 
custody of his children, and his child support was increased by $1,500 a month.  This 
made it extremely difficult for him to pay any of his previously incurred marital debts.  
Applicant and his wife divorced in 2012.  Applicant’s ex-wife filed for Chapter 13 
Bankruptcy relief in May 2011.  Applicant states that he intends to file bankruptcy to 
resolve his delinquent debt.      
 
  In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a letter from his attorney who was 
retained on November 9, 2018, to prepare and file a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy petition in 
court on behalf of the Applicant.  Each of the unsecured debts listed in the SOR are also 
listed in the attorney’s letter, indicating that they will be included in the Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy petition.  Applicant’s attorney further indicates that upon entry of an Order of 
Discharge, the Applicant will be discharged from any legal obligation to pay the debts.   
 
  The following debts are listed in the SOR: 
 
 1.a.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$17,483.  Applicant contends that the debt will be included in his Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
petition.  (Response to the FORM.) 
 
 1.b.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$9,785.  Applicant contends that the debt will be included in his Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
petition.  (Response to the FORM.) 
 
 1.c.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$8,879.  Applicant contends that the debt will be included in this Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
petition.  (Response to the FORM.)  
 
3 
 
  1.d.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$1,283.  Applicant contends that the debt will be included in his Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
petition.  (Response to the FORM.) 
 
 1.e.  A delinquent child support debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $15,083.  Applicant explained that this debt is not in collection.  
The current balance as of August 24, 2018, was $5,405.49.  Applicant is paying the 
debt by court-ordered garnishment from each paycheck in the amount of $712.29.  His 
back child support will be paid off after tax year 2018.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.f.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $2,588.  Applicant contends that this debt will be included in his Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy petition.  (Response to the FORM.) 
 
 1.g.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $753.  Applicant contends that the debt will be included in his Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy petition.  (Response to the FORM.) 
 
 1.h.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $1,025.  Applicant contends that the debt will be included in his Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy petition.  (Response to the FORM.) 
 
 1.i.  A delinquent debt owed to the Federal Government for back taxes in the 
approximate amount of $700 for tax year 2013.  Applicant stated that this debt was paid 
off when his 2017 state tax refunds were intercepted.  Applicant has provided a letter 
from the state tax authorities which he purports indicates that that his refund of $716.58 
was intercepted to pay his Federal tax debt for tax year 2013.  (See Response to SOR 
and attachment.)      
 
  Letters of recommendation from the Program Manager and the ACT Paint and 
Sign Shop Lead, who Applicant has worked with for the past nine years plus, indicate 
that Applicant has had to deal with the difficulties in life, namely the perils of divorce, 
and tragedies such as the loss of his brother, and his mother, yet his professionalism 
and work product did not waver.  Applicant is said to be a very skilled professional, who 
is an extremely hard worker.  He is described as being reliable and trustworthy and 
dedicated to the mission.  He has excellent work attendance and is considered to be an 
individual of sound moral character and judgment.  They both recommended him for a 
security clearance.  (Answer to SOR and attachments.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant became delinquently indebted during his marriage.  After his divorce, 
he was unable to pay the debts he incurred during the marriage, since his child support 
payments were drastically increased.  To resolve his delinquent debt, he has hired an 
attorney who is filing for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy relief on his behalf.  Each of the creditors 
listed in the SOR will be included in the Chapter 7 Bankruptcy petition.  Under the 
circumstances, the evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a)  the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
6 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
Applicant has shown a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent marital debt.  He 
is or has filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy and the debts listed in the SOR will or have 
been discharged.  There is nothing else in the record that leads one to believe that 
Applicant is not forthcoming or that he has been unreasonable and irresponsible.  
Applicant clearly understands that he must live within his means at all times, and pay 
his bills in a timely manner.  His has paid off his Federal taxes and is paying his child 
support every pay period.  Under the circumstances, he has acted reasonably and 
responsibly with respect to his debts.  Assuming he has filed for Chapter 7, and his legal 
obligation to pay the debts has been discharged by the court, it is found that his debts 
are now under control.  Furthermore, Applicant has not incurred any new debt since his 
marriage, as the debts listed in the SOR were incurred during his marriage.  Thus, he 
has demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely.  There are clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved.  In the event that Applicant 
does not follow through with his plan to file for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy and to have each 
of the debts listed in the SOR discharged that have not been paid, his security 
clearance will be in immediate jeopardy.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant is well respected by his colleagues 
supervisor and management. He has shown good judgment and reliability and 
demonstrated that he is financially responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a: through 1.i.  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
