 
1 
 
 
 
                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
  
             
 
                              
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-03395 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/03/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 31, 2015. 
On December 12, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 19, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on November 26, 2018, and 
the case was assigned to me on December 4, 2018. On December 13, 2018, I issued an 
order to both parties to produce their evidence by December 26, 2018, and the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled 
for January 8, 2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted, without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D were admitted, without 
objection. I received the completed transcript (TR) on January 16, 2019. I held the record 
open until February 4, 2019, to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. He 
timely submitted AE E through AE J, which I admitted without objection.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. He attended some college courses and is just short of 
an associate’s degree. Applicant was married to his first wife from 2008 until they divorced 
in 2012. He married his second wife in May 2014, and they separated in July 2015, and 
divorced in January 2016. Applicant has worked for his current employer as an electrical 
installer since late 2016. (GE 1; Tr. 20-21, 34) 
 
During his first marriage, Applicant paid the family mortgage and financially 
supported members of his wife’s family. He used credit cards to supplement their income 
and cover household expenses. When they divorced in 2012, he was required to assume 
responsibility for all of the marital debts, including the debts alleged in the SOR, and his 
wife was awarded their house. After the divorce, Applicant was unable to continue to 
make the minimum monthly payments, in part, because he was laid off from his job in 
early 2013. He also financially supported his second wife throughout their marriage. When 
Applicant started working for his current employer, in late 2016, his salary nearly doubled. 
(Tr. 20-23, 27, 33, 37) 
 
 Applicant opened the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. in 1996 and made 
payments until approximately 2013. The debt was charged off by the creditor in March 
2014. In December 2017, Applicant was issued a 1099-C for cancellation of debt, which 
required him to pay $6,500 in state and federal income taxes on the discharged debt. 
Applicant made payments toward these debts in 2018, and resolved the outstanding state 
and federal income tax liabilities in early 2019. (GE 2 at 4; GE 3 at 2; AE A; AE D; AE H; 
AE I; AE J; Tr. 17, 19-20, 22, 25, 30, 36) 
 
 Applicant opened the credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. in 2006 and made 
payments until approximately 2012 or 2013. He attempted to make settlement 
arrangements with the creditor several times, but experienced difficulty communicating 
with the creditor. In January 2019, Applicant signed an agreement to settle the debt for 
just under $8,000 and made a $500 payment. (GE 2 at 4; GE 3 at 2; AE A; AE G; AE J; 
Tr. 22-24, 29-30) 
 
Applicant’s current finances are in good standing, and he has no new delinquent 
debts. He provided documentation that he has resolved and paid debts that were not 
alleged in the SOR. Finally, he attended credit counseling and follows a written budget. 
(AE A; AE B; AE C; AE E; AE F; AE J; Tr. 15-16, 31-35, 38, 49)  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.1  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence establish two disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant experienced personal financial issues related to his two divorces and a 
period of unemployment. In late 2017, he learned that he had a tax debt related to the 
cancellation of one of his marital credit cards. Throughout 2018, he made payments 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
toward this debt and resolved it in early 2019. He signed a settlement agreement for his 
remaining unresolved debt and has made a substantial payment. His actions demonstrate 
a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. 
 
Applicant follows a written budget and sought credit counseling. Applicant pays all 
of his current financial obligations and has no new delinquent debts. He is willing and able 
to live within his means, which is reflected in the testimonial and documentary evidence. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) was established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. 
 
I conclude Applicant met his burden of proof and persuasion. He mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns and established his eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the 
United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
