KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: In this case, we note that Applicant’s tax problems date back to 2010 and also include
tax deficiencies in a number of subsequent years.  Since the inception of his tax problems,
significant gaps have occurred during which Applicant has not demonstrated any meaningful
efforts to resolve those problems.  Additionally, his latest installment agreement was established
after the SOR was issued.  Given the record that was before him, the Judge did not err in
concluding that Applicant had failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising
from the Federal tax liens. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03462.a2
DATE: 06/26/2019
DATE: June 26, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
----------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 17-03462
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
David B. Hanley, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 2, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On September 26, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Philip J. Katauskas granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Department Counsel appealed the Judge’s decision.  
On December 18, 2018, the Appeal Board remanded the case to the Judge to correct
identified errors, to provide the parties the opportunity to submit additional evidence, and to issue
a new decision.  On April 2, 2019, the Judge issued a Decision on Remand in which he denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appeal appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his
analysis of the evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s Decision on Remand.
In our prior decision, we noted we did not disagree with the Judge’s conclusion that
Applicant had mitigated a state tax lien.  In the Decision on Remand, the Judge again found for
Applicant on that state tax lien, which is not an issue in this appeal.    
The current appeal concerns two Federal tax liens totaling about $118,000 that Applicant
admitted in his SOR response.  The SOR reflects that the larger Federal tax lien was filed in early
2014, and the other was filed in late 2015.  Both liens arose from the operation of Applicant’s
business.  In his latest decision, the Judge noted Applicant submitted two exhibits on remand.1  One
of those exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) I) reflected that Applicant made $72,000 in payments
to the IRS under an installment agreement during 2014.  The other exhibit (AE J) showed monthly
payments of Federal payroll taxes in 2014.  In the latest decision, the Judge also noted: 
Applicant remains delinquent on federal quarterly business taxes for the following
time periods:  December 2010, March and June 2011, September 2011, September
2015, March 2016, June 2016, September 2016, December 2016, March 2017, and
June 2017.  He remains delinquent in unemployment taxes for December 2013 and
December 2016.  Applicant remains delinquent on federal corporate taxes for
December 2016.  In addition, the Government observes that Applicant’s total
outstanding Federal tax debt at the time of the [second] installment agreement was
$109,230. [Decision on Remand at 3, footnote omitted.]
1 In the Decision on Remand, the Judge incorporated by reference his findings of fact from his earlier decision.
He noted the two exhibits that Applicant submitted on remand did not change his original findings of fact.  Decision on
Remand at 3.  
2
The Judge concluded:
The open question is whether Applicant’s modifications to his business tax practices
have been responsible.  The Government’s strongest evidence on this point is that
Applicant has consistently underpaid his federal taxes from 2010 through 2017,
notwithstanding installment agreements.  . . .  Applicant’s persistent tax
delinquencies are evidence that Applicant’s business reforms have not proven to be
sufficient.  In short, the Government contends that Applicant has not acted
responsibly under AG ¶ 20(b).2  I agree.  The Appeal Board found error in my
conclusion that Applicant had complied with the IRS guidance that he “keep up with 
current taxes.” [Footnote omitted.]  Neither of Applicant’s two exhibits submitted on
remand give me a factual basis to find that Applicant has kept current with his taxes.
[Decision on Remand at 4.]
In his appeal brief, Applicant argues that he has acted responsibly in addressing his tax
problems.  He points out that he has made payments of $72,000 under his first installment agreement
and has been paying a $1,000 a month under a second installment agreement that he entered into in
December 2017.  He contends that Mitigating Condition 20(g) applies because he has made
arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to pay the amount owed and is in compliance with
those arrangements.3  We do not find Applicant’s arguments persuasive.  In ISCR Case No. 17-
01807 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2018), we observed:
The mere . . . existence of a payment arrangement with an appropriate tax authority
does not compel a Judge to issue a favorable decision.  As with the application of any
mitigating condition, the Judge must examine the record evidence and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa. 
The timing of corrective action is an appropriate factor for the Judge to consider in
the application of mitigating condition 20(g) as well as in considering aspects of
other overlapping mitigating conditions, such as, in determining whether an applicant
acted responsibly under the circumstances, whether an applicant’s past financial
deficiencies are unlikely to recur, or whether an applicant initiated good-faith efforts
to resolve financial problems. [Footnotes omitted.] 
In this case, we note that Applicant’s tax problems date back to 2010 and also include tax
deficiencies in a number of subsequent years.  Since the inception of his tax problems, significant
gaps have occurred during which Applicant has not demonstrated any meaningful efforts to resolve
2 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(b) states, “ the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death,
divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
3 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(g) states, “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”
3
those problems.  Additionally, his latest installment agreement was established after the SOR was
issued.  Given the record that was before him, the Judge did not err in concluding that Applicant had
failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from the Federal tax liens.
Applicant further contends that there is no indication the Judge considered the whole-person
concept in issuing his Decision on Remand.  In that decision, however, the Judge noted in Footnote
14 that he “considered the whole-person concept in reaching my conclusions on remand.”
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amounts to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence.  These arguments are not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence
in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08684
at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2017). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
