 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 18-01656 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Price, Esq., and Andre M. Gregorian, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/05/2019 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 In 2008, Applicant negligently took a classified document home and stored it in a 
file box in his garage. In 2011, he discovered the document and shredded it. Later in 
2011, he disclosed his negligent handling of the classified document. His negligent 
handling of the classified document is not recent. Guideline K (handling protected 
information) security concerns are mitigated. However, in 2016, he used 
countermeasures to attempt to manipulate a counterintelligence-polygraph test. Security 
concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct) are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On April 19, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On June 29, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AGs), effective June 8, 2017. The SOR set forth security concerns arising under 
Guidelines E and K. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
 
2                                         
 
On July 23, 2018, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. (HE 3) Department 
Counsel requested a hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 13) On March 13, 2019, the case was 
assigned to me. On April 22, 2019, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for May 2, 2019. (HE 1) The hearing was 
held as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 17-20; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-B) On May 15, 2019, DOHA 
received a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 2.a. 
(Tr. 21-22; HE 3) He also provided mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old Air Force mission planner employed by a government 
contractor. (Tr. 6-7; GE 1) In 1998, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 6; GE 1) In 2018, 
he received a bachelor of science degree in liberal arts. (Tr. 6) He served in the Air Force 
from 1998 to 2008. (Tr. 7, 22) He left active duty as a staff sergeant (E-5), and he received 
an honorable discharge. (Tr. 7) His Air Force specialty was cable-antenna technician, and 
he cross-trained as an airborne cryptologic linguist. He held a top secret clearance with 
access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) starting in 2006. (Tr. 7, 23) He has 
worked for his current employer since September 2017. (Tr. 8) In 1997, Applicant married, 
and his children are ages 16, 18, and 20. (Tr. 8) 
 
Removal of Classified Document from a SCI Facility (SCIF) 
 
 Applicant received routine training about handling of classified information. (Tr. 24-
25, 27) In 2008, Applicant attended training inside a SCIF, which involved his use of 
classified documents. (Tr. 28) He unintentionally brought a document classified at the 
secret level to his home, and he stored it in a file box in his garage. (Tr. 28-29; SOR 
response) The document was clearly marked as secret. (Tr. 29)2 In about March 2011, 
he discovered the classified document in his garage. (Tr. 28; 63) He transported the 
classified document to an Air Force unit where he was working, and he shredded the 
document. (Tr. 30) He did not have authorization to transport classified documents 
outside of the SCIF. (Tr. 61) He did not timely disclose his possession at home and 
subsequent destruction of the classified document because he did not want to get in 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 In Applicant’s April 19, 2016 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security 
clearance application (SCA), Applicant said the document he erroneously took home was “protected 
information” not classified information. (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) At his hearing, he acknowledged that 
it was a classified document, and he conceded it was possible that he was trying to minimize what he had 
done in his SCA by not characterizing the document as classified. (Tr. 58-59) No adverse inference is made 
because of Applicant’s incorrect description of his handling of the classified document in his SCA.  
 
3                                         
 
trouble. (Tr. 30-31) Several months after he destroyed the classified document, Applicant 
was interviewed before his counterintelligence polygraph examination. (Tr. 31, 63) He 
disclosed to the polygrapher that he mishandled the classified document in 2008, and 
destroyed it in 2011. (Tr. 31-32, 63-65) He passed the counterintelligence polygraph 
examination in 2011. (Tr. 65) His security clearance was suspended for about three 
months after his 2011 polygraph due to his mishandling of the classified document. (Tr. 
32, 57-58)  
 
Polygraph Countermeasures 
 
Prior to 2016, Applicant had done some research on methods of manipulating the 
polygraph-test result. (Tr. 45-46, 55-56) In 2016, Applicant was scheduled for a routine 
counterintelligence-polygraph examination. (Tr. 35) The polygrapher discussed the test 
questions and polygraph procedures with Applicant during the pre-polygraph interview. 
(Tr. 36-37) Applicant was aware that his rate of breathing could affect the polygraph-test 
results. (Tr. 66) Before a polygraph examination, the polygrapher tells the person being 
tested to give false answers to control questions about mundane topics such as the 
number of times the test taker drove in excess of the speed limit or the number of times 
the test taker caused a family member to be angered. These control questions are 
considered “known lies.” The physiological responses, including rate of breathing, to the 
control questions are compared to the responses to the questions relevant to 
counterintelligence issues. (Tr. 38-39, 49-50) To pass the polygraph, there should be 
more of a physiological response to lying to a control question than telling the truth on a 
relevant question. 
 
During the polygraph examination, the polygrapher accused Applicant of 
attempting to manipulate the polygraph-test results. (Tr. 37) Applicant admitted that he 
was “breathing faster and kind of tricked [himself] into being scared” during the control 
questions. (Tr. 38) He attempted to magnify or exaggerate his responses during the 
control questions. (Tr. 38, 45, 48-49) He said he believed his physiological responses to 
the control questions were too low, and he became scared. (Tr. 39-40) He was just trying 
to ensure he had the “desired response” to enable him to pass the polygraph. (Tr. 39-40) 
He admitted to the polygrapher that he was trying to manipulate the polygraph test 
through fast breathing. (Tr. 45) He subsequently told an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator that he wanted his answers to the control questions to “light up like a 
Christmas tree.” (Tr. 43) He admitted that he intentionally attempted to manipulate the 
polygraph-test results. (Tr. 44)  
 
Applicant claimed that during the polygraph he did not understand that his 
manipulative efforts could cause an erroneous polygraph-test result. (Tr. 50) He believed 
he was helping the polygrapher receive an accurate test result through his enhancement 
of his responses to the control questions. (Tr. 54) In other words, he did not believe there 
was any reason to suspect himself of being a counterintelligence concern, and his 
manipulation was designed to ensure the polygrapher did not erroneously find a 
counterintelligence issue. He understands now that his efforts to “assist” the polygrapher 
by breathing faster during the control questions did not actually help the polygrapher. (Tr. 
54-55) Applicant has not taken a counterintelligence polygraph after the 2016 test was 
terminated due to his countermeasures. (Tr. 62)     
 
4                                         
 
Applicant said he accepted responsibility for his decisions, and if he had an 
opportunity to make the same decisions that he made in 2011 and 2016 now, he would 
choose differently and scrupulously comply with security requirements. (Tr. 67) He had 
no fear of providing answers to the counterintelligence questions, and he would timely 
report security violations. (Tr. 67)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 An Air Force captain and a program manager described Applicant as careful about 
compliance with security requirements. (AE A; AE B) Applicant has sound judgment and 
is loyal to the United States. Applicant has an excellent reputation and contributes to 
mission accomplishment. They support continuation of Applicant’s security clearance.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
5                                         
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required. 
 
AG ¶ 16 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
 
6                                         
 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . . ; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges and Applicant admits that he knowingly increased his rate of 
breathing on the control questions of his 2016 counterintelligence-polygraph test as a 
countermeasure to manipulate the test result.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges and Applicant admits that in 2008, he negligently took a 
classified document from the SCIF to his home, and he stored it in a file box in his garage 
until he discovered it in 2011. He transported the classified document to an Air Force unit 
and shredded it in 2011. He disclosed his negligent handling of a classified document 
during a pre-polygraph interview in 2011. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b establishes AG ¶¶ 15(a), 16(d)(1), and 
16(e). Additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions is 
required. 
 
Six personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable 
in this case:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
7                                         
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 
2013), concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the applicability of 
mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) applies to Applicant’s negligent handling of the classified document in 
2008 and his improper destruction of the document in 2011. His negligent conduct is not 
recent. It occurred on two occasions, and it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s attempted manipulation of 
his polygraph test in 2016. His manipulation was premeditated and intentional. It was 
designed to mislead the polygrapher. His attempted countermeasures are relatively 
recent, serious, and not mitigated.  
 
Handling Protected Information  
 
AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 
8                                         
 
AG ¶ 34 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(b) collecting or storing protected information in any unauthorized location; 
and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a cross alleges the same conduct described in the personal conduct 
section under SOR ¶ 1.b. The record establishes AG ¶¶ 34(b) and 34(g).  
 
AG ¶ 35 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or 
unclear instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
AG ¶ 35(a) is established for the same reasons AG ¶ 17(c) is established as 
discussed in the personal conduct section. Handling protected information security 
concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
9                                         
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines K and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old Air Force mission planner employed by a government 
contractor. In 2018, he received a bachelor of science degree in liberal arts. (Tr. 6) He 
served in the Air Force from 1998 to 2008. He left active duty as a staff sergeant, and he 
received an honorable discharge. He held a top secret clearance with access to SCI 
starting in 2006.  
 
Applicant’s supervisor and program manager lauded his loyalty, judgment, 
diligence, and contributions to mission accomplishment. They supported continuation of 
his access to classified information. 
 
In 2016, Applicant knowingly and intentionally attempted to manipulate his 
physiological responses to polygraph-control questions during a counterintelligence 
polygraph examination. AG ¶ 15 indicates, “Of special interest is any failure to cooperate 
or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes.” Applicant’s actions raise serious security concerns. The 
protection of national security relies on applicants to cooperate with and not to mislead or 
intentionally jeopardize security clearance processes. Applicant did not establish his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Guideline K 
security concerns are mitigated; however, Guideline E security concerns are not 
mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
  
 
10                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
