 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
  
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02407 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dan Meyer, Esq. 
 
06/19/2019 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement and substance misuse. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 On November 16, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and originally requested 
an administrative determination. Applicant hired counsel and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on April 4, 2019. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
 
 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 25, 2019, and the hearing was held on May 
22, 2019. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1-4, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (Tab) A through E, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant’s counsel submitted a hearing brief, which was 
marked as HE II and an exhibit list, which was marked as HE III. The record remained 
open and Applicant timely submitted Applicant exhibit (AE) F, which was admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2019. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the SOR allegations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is married and has no children. He has worked for 
his current employer, a defense contractor, since May 2010. He first worked for a 
federal contractor in 2008, which is when he obtained a security clearance. He has a 
master’s degree. (Tr. at18, 20, 26-27; GE 1) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency, from March 
2005 to July 2017; that he used marijuana while holding a security clearance; and that 
in April 2018, when he completed his security clearance application (SCA), he stated he 
intended to use marijuana in the future. 
  
 Applicant admitted using marijuana a few times in 2005. He discontinued using 
marijuana because he did not find it interesting and he was concerned such use would 
hamper his ability to obtain a job. He was granted a security clearance in 2008 after 
filling out an security clearance application (SCA), which asked him about recent drug 
use. He resumed using marijuana in approximately December 2017, in an attempt to 
relieve his headaches and as a way to relax. He held a security clearance at the time 
and knew use of marijuana was against federal law and the law of his state of 
residence. He continued to use marijuana approximately 20 times through June 2018. 
He filled out another SCA in April 2018, admitting his use of marijuana and stating that 
he intended to continue to use marijuana in the future. He continued to use marijuana 
until June 2018. He was interviewed by a defense investigator in July 2018. He told the 
investigator that he did not intend to continue using marijuana because he no longer 
found it interesting and it was “hit or miss” with providing headache relief. Upon cross 
examination at hearing, he admitted that one reason he changed his view of future 
marijuana use was because he discovered the impact such use had on his security 
clearance and possibly his job. (Tr. at 29-30, 32, 34-36; GE 1-4) 
 
 When Applicant was using marijuana he used it with his wife, his sister, and 
some friends. He used by smoking the marijuana. He claims that both his sister and his 
wife have stopped using marijuana (wife provided a negative drug test from March 
2019), and that his friends either no longer use marijuana or they do not use in his 
 
3 
 
 
presence. He sought treatment for substance-induced anxiety disorder in July 2018 and 
successfully completed counseling later that month. Other than a letter describing his 
successful completion of counseling, no specific treatment plan, or prognosis, was set 
out. In May 2019, he signed a written statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the 
future. He also provided two drugs tests from March 2019 and May 2019 showing that 
he tested negative for marijuana on both occasions. Applicant indicated that he now 
uses meditation as a substitute for marijuana to deal with his anxiety. (Tr. at 38, 41-43; 
Tab C, E; AE F) 
 
 Applicant presented seven declarations from friends and a former coworker. 
They described Applicant as truthful, trustworthy, responsible, and possessing good 
judgment. They all believe he will not use illegal drugs in the future. His 2018 job 
performance appraisal gave him an overall evaluation of “substantial impact,” which was 
the highest rating for his employee category. (Tabs C-D) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive section E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive section E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
 AG 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 In addition to the above matters, I note that the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued an October 25, 2014 memorandum concerning adherence to federal laws 
prohibiting marijuana use. In doing so, the DNI emphasized three things. First, no state 
can authorize violations of federal law, including violations of the Controlled Substances 
Act, which identifies marijuana as a Schedule I controlled drug. Second, changes to 
state law (and the laws of the District of Columbia) concerning marijuana use do not 
alter the national security adjudicative guidelines. And third, a person’s disregard of 
federal law concerning the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains relevant 
when making eligibility decisions for sensitive national security positions. 
 
 AG 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable in this case include: 
 
(a) any substance misuse;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia;   
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and   
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a few occasions in 2005, stopped using for about 12 
years, then resumed his use between December 2017 and June 2018 on approximately 
20 occasions. He has held a security clearance since 2008. In his 2018 SCA, he stated 
his intent was to continue using marijuana. I find all the above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
 AG 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two potentially 
apply in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
 involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
 involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
 eligibility; and  
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s use and of marijuana was frequent and as recent as June 2018, while 
holding a security clearance and after he recently completed an updated SCA. Given 
his recent pattern of use, his claimed abstinence beginning in June 2018 is not 
 
6 
 
 
sufficiently attenuated to be considered remote. Although he provided a signed 
statement of intent to abstain from all future illegal drug use, as recently as April 2018 
he indicated his intent was to continue his use of marijuana despite knowing it was 
unlawful to do so. He claims his wife, sister and friends that he associates with no 
longer use marijuana. Applicant’s claimed abstention is insufficient to convince me that 
recurrence is unlikely. The frequency and recency of his past use and his recent 
statement of intent to continue his use casts doubt upon his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 26(a) does not apply and AG 26(b) has some 
application.  
 
 Although he received counseling for substance-induced anxiety disorder in July 
2018, that evidence does not contain a prognosis by a qualified medical professional. 
AG 26(d) has some application. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant 
voluntarily disclosed his marijuana history, his character references, his work 
performance, his drug counseling, his recent negative drug-test results, and his stated 
intention of no future use. However, I also considered that he used marijuana on 
numerous occasions while holding a security clearance and that as recently as April 
2018, he expressed his intent to continue using marijuana. It was only after he realized 
that using marijuana jeopardized his security clearance that he had a change of heart 
concerning his future intentions.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs     1.a - 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
