 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
   
   
           
     
      
             
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-02591 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/12/2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns about 
his unpaid taxes, his failure to timely file some of his federal and state tax returns, and 
other financial problems. His request for continued security clearance eligibility is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On December 5, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for a security clearance 
required for his employment with a federal contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
 
 
2 
 
 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have a security clearance.1 
 
 On November 9, 2018, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns under the adjudicative guideline for financial considerations 
(Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on March 11, 2019, and convened the requested hearing on 
April 18, 2019. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 – 9. Applicant testified and proffered Applicant Exhibits (AX) 
A – C. All exhibits were admitted without objection. I received a transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on May 6, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged Applicant owed the IRS $13,500 for 
unpaid taxes from the 2012 and 2017 tax years (SOR 1.a); that he failed to timely file his 
federal income tax returns for the tax years 2012 through 2017 (SOR 1.b); and his state 
income tax returns for the tax years 2016 and 2017 (SOR 1.d). It was further alleged that 
Applicant owed $1,314.66 for past-due state income taxes for the 2014 tax year pursuant 
to a tax lien filed against him in April 2018 (SOR 1.c); that he owed $12,963 for six 
delinquent or past-due commercial debts (SOR 1.e – 1.j); and that on August 29, 2018, 
he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection through a petition that was still pending 
approval as of the issuance of the SOR (SOR 1.k). 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, the SOR 1.a – 1.j 
allegations. As to SOR 1.k, Applicant denied the allegation, averring that the Chapter 13 
petition was confirmed on November 9, 2018 and that he was making payments as 
required under the trustee’s plan. (Answer) In addition to the facts established by 
Applicant’s admissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. After he graduated from high school in June 1991, he 
joined the U.S. Navy where he served as a machinist’s mate until receiving an honorable 
discharge in June 1997. He is seeking to renew a security clearance he received in 2011. 
When he submitted his e-QIP in December 2017, he disclosed the fact that he had not 
timely filed his federal income tax returns for 2012 through 2016; that he had not yet filed 
his 2016 state income tax returns; and that he owed the debts alleged at SOR 1.e – 1.i. 
(GX 1; Tr. 6, 74) 
 
 Applicant was married from June 1993 until divorcing in October 2008. He has six 
children, some with his ex-wife and some outside the marriage, ranging in age from 5 to 
28. Applicant is paying child support only for his youngest child. Since May 2002, 
Applicant has lived with his mother, who has a variety of medical conditions. He helps 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
pay the rent and other expenses, and he is her primary care giver. (GX 1; Tr. 6 – 7, 15 – 
16, 39 – 41, 65, 74 – 75) 
 
 Applicant has worked as a warehouse specialist for two different companies since 
May 2006. He was laid off in July 2014 when his employer lost its federal contract. 
Applicant resumed working in December 2014 and remained employed as a procurement 
specialist until April 2017, when he again was laid off for one month after a lost contract. 
Applicant has been steadily employed since May 2017. His average monthly income has 
been $3,000. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 33 – 37)  
 
 Between 2013, when his youngest child was born, and 2016, Applicant was 
actively involved with the child’s mother in caring for and supporting the child. He often 
took the child to and from daycare, and cared for the child where the mother lived; 
however, Applicant has only seen his child once in the last two-and-one-half years. In 
2016, the child’s mother demanded financial support from Applicant. Applicant responded 
by requesting a DNA test to verify his paternity. That request meant that he was not 
obligated to make payments pending the results, which were positive. Applicant became 
obligated to make monthly child support payments beginning in March 2017, including an 
arrearage that accrued while the DNA test was pending. Between 2016 and 2018, the 
mother of Applicant’s youngest child instituted multiple court hearings seeking 
modification of Applicant’s child support payments. Between 2016 and 2018, Applicant 
has had to appear in at least eight such hearings, and only recently was able to finalize a 
child support requirement of $504 each month. The payments are made from his bi-
weekly paychecks at a rate of $232.61. (Answer; GX 2; GX 9; Tr. 45, 58 – 59, 77 – 78, 
81 – 85) 
 
 For the tax years 2012 through 2015, the grandmother of the mother of Applicant’s 
youngest child prepared and filed Applicant’s federal and state tax returns. After initially 
receiving refunds for those years, Applicant was notified in 2017 that mistakes had been 
made in those tax returns and that Applicant actually owed about $8,000. The amount 
referenced in SOR 1.a is the result of interest and penalties. Applicant did not timely file 
his 2016 federal income tax returns because he could not obtain his W-2 form from the 
employer who laid him off in April 2017. He also delayed resolving his 2016 filing because 
he was often involved in court hearings for child support. The same was true for his late 
filing of his 2017 tax returns in 2018. By that time, Applicant was consulting with his 
bankruptcy attorney who advised Applicant the attorney would file the return as part of 
his bankruptcy services. All of Applicant’s past-due income tax returns have been filed. 
(Answer; GX 2; GX 6; HX 9; Tr. 46 – 58, 78 – 80, 85 – 87) 
 
 Applicant incurred the debts addressed at SOR 1.e – 1.j as a result of financial 
challenges that began when he was laid off in 2014. Applicant has acknowledged that he 
was not properly managing his finances at the time. To resolve his federal income tax 
debt, Applicant entered into a monthly repayment plan with the IRS in February 2018. 
Applicant agreed to pay $146 each month; however, before he could start making 
payments, he was sidetracked by additional child support hearings. The same was true 
 
 
4 
 
 
as he tried to negotiate repayment of his other past-due debts directly with his creditors. 
Until Applicant knew how much he had to pay in child support, he could not commit to 
regular payments. After March 2018, Applicant knew how much he had to pay in child 
support, so he resumed his communications with his creditors. The payments they 
demanded, even in settlement, exceeded what he could reasonably pay each month. 
Applicant contacted a bankruptcy attorney in July 2018 and filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection in August 2018 to resolve his debts. All of the debts alleged in the 
SOR, including the state and federal income tax debts, are included in Applicant’s petition. 
A repayment plan was approved in November 2018, and as of his hearing, Applicant had 
made the first seven of his plan’s 60 payments. Applicant is resolving his child support 
arrearage and his tax debts through $470 monthly payments under the bankruptcy plan. 
His bankruptcy and child support payments are paid as direct allotments from his 
paycheck. (Answer; GX 2; GX 6; AX A – C; Tr. 41 – 45, 79) 
 
  Appellant’s current finances are stable. After all of his monthly expenses, including 
his child support and bankruptcy payments, he has a positive monthly cash flow. 
Appellant has not incurred any new debts, and he has reduced his personal expenses 
living with his mother and closely managing his money. When Appellant first applied for 
a security clearance in 2009, he had other past-due debts that were addressed in that 
background investigation. Applicant resolved those debts in a timely manner. His 
personal and professional circumstances have improved, and he now has a better 
awareness of how to manage his personal finances. (Answer; GX 2; Tr. 60 – 61, 65 – 69, 
70 – 73)  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,2 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).3 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:  
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
                                                 
2 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
3 The current adjudicative guidelines were issued by the Director of National Intelligence on December 10, 
2016, to be effective for all adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information.  
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security 
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access 
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based 
on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government established that Applicant failed to file some of his state and 
federal income tax returns as required, and that he incurred the delinquent tax and other 
debts alleged in the SOR. That information reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s finances that is articulated generally at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
                                                 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, available information supported application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, 
or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required). 
 
By contrast, Applicant established that his financial problems, as well as his failure 
to meet his tax return filing obligations, arose from events and circumstances beyond his 
control that are not likely to recur. Applicant’s federal tax debt arose from errors made by 
the person who prepared his tax returns. Additionally, Appellant’s period of 
unemployment in 2014 came at a time when he still had multiple child support obligations. 
Since then, Applicant has been consistently employed and he now has only one child 
support payment. Applicant’s inability to address his tax debts was repeatedly interrupted 
by ongoing child support hearings that are now completed.  
 
Once those issues were settled, Applicant could not negotiate affordable 
resolutions with his private creditors and elected to resolve all of his debts, including his 
tax debts and a child support arrearage, through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment 
plan. Under the circumstances, this was a timely and reasonable course of action. As of 
his hearing, Applicant had made the first seven payments required by the bankruptcy plan 
and his regular child support payments have been allotted directly from his bi-weekly pay. 
 
All of Applicant’s income tax returns have been filed, and he is in good standing 
on all of his current obligations. His monthly finances are sound, he has a positive monthly 
cash flow, and he has not incurred any new delinquent or past-due debts. All of the 
foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 On balance, I conclude the record as a whole is sufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the Government’s information about Applicant’s finances. 
 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s response to adverse financial circumstances reflects well on his 
judgment and reliability. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record evidence as 
a whole shows the security concerns about his finances are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
