 
1 
 
                                 
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
                             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02536 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/11/2019 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the psychological conditions security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 14, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline I 
(psychological conditions). Applicant responded to the SOR on January 4, 2019, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
April 8, 2019.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 11, 2019, scheduling the hearing for May 9, 2019. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 2 and 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. GE 1 was admitted over Applicant’s objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2012. She seeks to retain a security clearance, which she 
has held since about 2014. She has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 2010, a 
master’s degree that was awarded in 2012, and additional educational certifications. 
She has never married, and she has no children.1  
 
Applicant is an honest, intelligent woman who displayed issues at her work in late 
2015 and early 2016. She was off work for a period. She sent an e-mail to a co-worker 
in January 2016 in which she explained her problems: 
 
Following the discussion we had prior to the Holidays, I am seriously 
concerned about my safety at the office. I don't care if the whole world 
thinks I am crazy. Below are my experiences at the office for the past 
several months. I believe: 
 
1. My eye movements are being tracked while I am working. I believe it 
tracks your emotions such as Anger, Happy, Hatred etc. 
 
2. They are watching what I eat, the time it takes (the duration of every 
task that I do), the frequency of my restroom breaks, etc. 
 
3. What really bothers me is the fact that I am being monitored while I am 
off work, when I am at home or in my car, the conversations that I have at 
home and in my car.  
 
I don't care if you think I am totally crazy, but this has been my experience 
at the office. I am sick to my stomach. The thought of being tracked of 
every move I make is draining me out mentally, physically and 
emotionally. I cannot eat, I cannot sleep and I can't even function properly 
not knowing what is going on. There is definitely something going on at 
the office. No person just simply thinks that these kinds of things are 
happening to them. I have been calling in sick because I am truly terrified 
to go to work not knowing what is going on. They are doing something to 
harm me. They will hurt me for sure. I am truly concerned about my safety 
at the office. . . .2 
 
 Applicant’s employer placed her on involuntary leave and recommended that she 
see a psychiatrist and attend counseling through the employee assistance program 
(EAP). She saw a psychiatrist and attended about nine sessions with a licensed 
professional counselor (LPC). Her psychiatrist wrote a letter in February 2016 and 
stated that on examination, he “could confirm no psychiatric contraindication to 
                                                          
1 Transcript (Tr.) at 25-27; GE 1; AE C. 
 
2 
 
AE D. 
 
3 
 
[Applicant] performing her job,” and she was “released psychiatrically to return to work 
full-time, without restriction.” She returned to work in early March 2016.3  
 
Applicant was evaluated at the DOD’s request by a licensed psychologist in April 
2018. The psychologist wrote: 
 
[Applicant] struggles with the symptoms of a serious mental illness. She 
qualifies for a diagnosis of Schizophrenia, First Episode, currently in 
partial remission. Additionally, she qualifies for a diagnosis of Schizotypal 
Personality Disorder. Her primary symptoms include bizarre delusions of 
reference and paranoia (she was being watched by eye-tracking software, 
her mood was monitored, and she was an unwilling participant in a 
research study; she developed delusions about “black projects” funded by 
shadow budgets and staffed by people with aliases who were hidden by 
[Employer]) and auditory hallucinations (women talking about her, 
discussing her, conducting a commentary about her life). Her 
hallucinations are a classic auditory type hallucination in that they come 
from outside of her body (she identified a location), they were generally in 
a fixed point of reference (she identified the source as an empty cubicle), 
they were same-gender voices (women), and they were carrying on a 
running commentary that was consistent with her delusions and did not 
interact with her. 
 
The psychologist concluded:  
 
Reliability, Judgment, Stability, and Trustworthiness: Due to the 
nature of her mental illness and personality disorder, and due to her 
inconsistent level of insight and demonstrated ability to be evasive during 
an interview, it is my clinical and professional opinion that [Applicant’s] 
Schizophrenia symptom potential and her ongoing Schizotypal Personality 
Disorder symptoms significantly impair her reliability, judgment, stability, 
and trustworthiness. It is clear that she has no specific malicious intent 
and she is most likely uninterested in any financial or personal gain that 
could arise from violating her position of trust. However, when dealing with 
her delusions, and when in environments that activate distress related to 
her schizotypal features, she is at high risk for inappropriately using, 
disclosing, or otherwise compromising classified or secure information or 
systems. Although she presents as a sympathetic case, the risk posed by 
her mental illness and personality disorder cannot be ignored. 
 
The prognosis was poor to guarded:  
 
Although her symptoms are generally mild and controllable with effort, 
they can be magnified to the moderate range, as indicated by the events 
of September 2015 to December 2015, especially if she is in an 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 22, 50-54, 58, 60; GE 1, 3; AE E. 
 
 
4 
 
unfavorable or stressful environment. Even with her high level skills and 
advanced technical education, there is no guarantee that she will not find 
herself in an environment she does not find favorable. If she does find 
herself transferred to such an environment (such as where she was with 
[defense project]) the likelihood of relapse is very high. This likelihood of 
relapse is magnified by her refusal to get treatment or follow through with 
recommendations for psychiatric care. 
 
The psychologist opined that Applicant presented an unacceptable security risk. 
However, he also emphasized that “no part of this report or recommendations should be 
taken to indicate that [Applicant] is not an appropriate and trustworthy employee under 
typical circumstances.” He concluded that she “should be allowed to continue work in 
her current environment and there is no indication that she would not be an effective 
and productive employee in a non-classified military or Government environment.” 
 
Applicant believes that she was targeted and monitored by cyber security at her 
office, at a conference, in her car, and at home for about four to five months through 
early 2016. She would overhear co-workers at work discussing what she did at home 
the night before. She submitted evidence, and I find, that there is technology that can 
monitor her in the way that she described.4 
 
Applicant has not experienced direct evidence of the monitoring since early 2016. 
However, in July 2016, she recorded people in her apartment who were supposed to be 
pest control. It was suspicious because there are three distinct voices, two females and 
a male, on the recording, and an actual pest control person had come by earlier in the 
day. She also indicated that the apartment complex had three maintenance workers 
who were all male. Applicant played the recording at the hearing, and her description of 
the voices is accurate. She did not ask the apartment complex if additional maintenance 
workers were in her apartment. Instead, she reported it to the FBI in September 2016. 
She never heard anything back from the FBI. She does not know if she has continued to 
be monitored without her knowledge. She moved to a house, which has more privacy 
than an apartment.5  
 
Applicant disagrees with the psychological evaluation. She asserted that there is 
information in the evaluation that is inaccurate, and she is quoted with statements that 
she never said. She is not resistant to treatment if she felt it necessary, but she does 
not believe it is necessary.6 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 22-29, 37, 44-50, 53-56, 65-68; AE A, B. 
 
5 Tr. at 30-36, 58-60. 
 
6 Tr. at 22, 38-43, 63-65, 70; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
 
 
Guideline I: Psychological Conditions 
The security concern for psychological conditions is set out in AG ¶ 27: 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline and an opinion, including 
prognosis, should be sought. No negative inference concerning the 
standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the basis of mental 
health counseling. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 28. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.  
 
The psychologist opined that Applicant “qualifies for a diagnosis of 
Schizophrenia, First Episode, currently in partial remission . . . [and] Schizotypal 
Personality Disorder.” He concluded that her “symptoms significantly impair her 
reliability, judgment, stability, and trustworthiness.” AG ¶ 28(b) is applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 29 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;  
 
 
7 
 
(d) the past psychological/psychiatric condition was temporary, the 
situation has been resolved, and the individual no longer shows 
indications of emotional instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
Applicant is an honest, intelligent woman who believes that she was targeted and 
monitored by cyber security at her office, at a conference, in her car, and at home for 
about four to five months through early 2016. She believes co-workers would discuss 
what she did at home the night before. If the monitoring did not occur, she is suffering 
from delusions that significantly impair her judgment, reliability, and ability to properly 
safeguard classified information. Based on the record, Applicant’s testimony, my 
observation of her demeanor, and the nature of her assertions, I find that Applicant has 
not rebutted the findings in the psychological evaluation. None of the above mitigating 
conditions, individually or collectively, are sufficient to alleviate psychological conditions 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline I in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I was very impressed by Applicant. I believe that but for her psychological issues, 
she would be a valued employee without any security concerns. However, the 
protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. It is required that 
“[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will 
be resolved in favor of the national security.” I agree with the psychologist that Applicant 
presented an unacceptable security risk, but I also agree that there is no indication that 
she is not an appropriate and trustworthy employee under typical circumstances or that 
she would not be an effective and productive employee in a non-classified environment. 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the psychological conditions security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
