 
1 
 
                                                              
                    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
    
       
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02259 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany M. White, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/17/2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 12, 2016. On 
October 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) implemented by the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM) on February 27, 2019. Applicant received the FORM on 
March 28, 2019. The Government’s evidence, included in the file, and identified as 
 
2 
 
Items 1 through 5, was admitted without objection.  Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM.  I was assigned the case on June 6, 2019.  
 
                                      Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about South Korea. The request and the attached source documents 
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record. All of the documents 
referenced in the Request for Administrative Notice and the facts asserted therein, are 
from open sources and are dated. South Korea, officially the Republic of Korea, is a 
self-governing state located in the southern part of the peninsula of Korea. The United 
States and South Korea share a long history of friendship and cooperation based on 
shared values and interests. The two countries work together to combat regional and 
global threats and to strengthen their economies. South Korea is now the United State’s 
sixth largest trading partner with a trillion-dollar economy. The longstanding relationship 
has brought positive rewards to the U.S. economy including more job opportunities for 
Americans. 
 
South Korea is one of the seven countries most actively engaged in foreign 
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States. Although South 
Korea is considered an ally, it has been the unauthorized recipient of technology 
controlled under U.S. export control laws, including material that could be used in 
missile delivery/reentry systems, encryption software, optics and prism data and 
infrared detectors and camera engines. Industrial espionage remains a high profile 
concern relating to South Korea and South Korean companies. In July 2014, a South 
Korean chemical company agreed to pay a criminal penalty of over two million dollars to 
resolve an investigation into the company’s attempted theft of a U.S. company’s trade 
secrets regarding a meta-aramid fiber used in protective fabrics, electrical insulation, 
and lightweight structural support for aircraft. Sources have also reported that South 
Korea may have attempted to compromise protected technology of U.S. F-15 fighters 
that it purchased. (Item 5) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 
 The SOR alleged  under Guideline B that (1.a) that Applicant’s grandmother is a 
citizen and resident of South Korea; (1.b) that he owns a home in South Korea with an 
approximate value of $270,000; (1.c) that he maintains a bank account in South Korea 
with an approximate value of $15,000; and (1.d) that Applicant maintains contact with 
two friends who are citizens and residents of South Korea, both of whom have 
completed or are currently serving mandatory service in the South Korean military. 
Applicant admitted all the allegations, but noted that the bank account has been 
transferred to his father’s account in South Korea. (Item 1, 2) 
 
 
3 
 
  Applicant is a 31-year-old, who was born in the United States to South Korean 
parents. He lived in South Korea prior to the age of 12. (Item 4) At the age of 15, he 
renounced his South Korean citizenship at the advice of his father so that he could 
avoid the mandatory military requirement in South Korea. (Item 3) He attended a 
university in South Korea in 2009 as an exchange student. (Item 3) He attended high 
school in the United States. Applicant obtained an undergraduate degree from an 
American university in May 2010. He received his master’s degree from another 
American university in 2016. 
 
  Applicant was married in late 2016 to a citizen of South Korea and is sponsoring 
her for a green card. (Item 4) She lives with Applicant. From September 2011 until 
September 2012, he resided in South Korea. Applicant noted on his 2016 security 
clearance application that he worked in South Korea from about 2010 until 2013. One 
employer was an IT company. (Item 3) His last reported visit to South Korea was in 
2017. Applicant is not employed but is sponsored for a security clearance by a defense 
contractor. He is taking courses for a certification in cyber security.   
  
 Applicant’s grandmother is 90 years old and has never worked outside the home.  
There is no information in the file concerning contact with Applicant’s grandmother. 
 
 Applicant owns a home in South Korea valued at about $270,000. He stated in 
his interview that he has owned the home since 2012. He also noted that it was a gift, 
but he maintains ownership of it and rents the home. He does not own any other 
property in South Korea. He does not know if he will keep the property in his name. 
(Item 4) 
 
 The bank account in South Korea was closed after his investigative interview. 
The money was transferred to his father’s account in South Korea. (Item 4) He opened 
the account in 2010, when he lived in South Korea. The amount in the account in 2012 
was $27,184. However, in the 2018 investigative interview, Applicant stated that he 
intended to close the account, but he had to physically be in South Korea to do so. 
Applicant also stated that perhaps his father could close the account on his next trip to 
South Korea.  
 
 Applicant maintains contact with two friends in South Korea .He explained during 
his investigative interview that he participates in an electronic chat with the two friends 
he met while living or studying in South Korea. He has several foreign national friends in 
the chat group, and has had weekly or daily contact with them. One friend is a South 
Korean citizen but lives in the United States. Applicant keeps in touch with another 
South Korean citizen who lives in Australia. He has daily to weekly electronic contact 
with him. (Item 4) The friends served mandatory service in the Korean military. 
Applicant feels allied with South Korea since he lived there as a child. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM to provide any additional information.  
Applicant expressed he has loyalty to the United States, he clearly stated that he will 
continue to have contact with his foreign national friends.  (Item 4)  Also, he has 
property in South Korea and provided no information that would mitigate the 
 
4 
 
importance. He is unemployed and lives with his family. Thus, financial interests cannot 
be weighed because he did not sufficiently explain his future intentions concerning the 
property. In addition, he is now married to a South Korean citizen. 
  
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s grandmother and various friends are citizens and residents of South 
Korea. Applicant’s foreign contacts may create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been 
raised by the evidence. In addition, Applicant has property in South Korea. He provided 
 
6 
 
no information about his own finances, except that he is unemployed. AG 7(f) raises 
another security concern due to financial interests. 
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States ;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.1  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
7 
 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant was born in the United States and renounced his South Korean 
citizenship. However, his grandmother still lives in South Korea. There is no information 
as to the contact, but family ties are presumed. He noted in his interview that he feels  
allied with South Korea since he lived there as a child. He now has a wife from South 
Korea who he is sponsoring for a green card. He provided no updated information in 
response to the FORM. He still maintains property in South Korea. He has worked in 
South Korea for an IT company. He maintains his group chats with his friends in South 
Korea. None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
  
.   
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B and in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
 
8 
 
were addressed under those guidelines. Applicant has not provided sufficient 
information to meet his burden of proof. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-d:   For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
         ________________________ 
         Noreen A. Lynch 
                                               Administrative Judge 
