 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
      
        
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02216 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/12/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and 
substance misuse. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 19, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 25, 2019. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 12, 
2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 17, 2019. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. GE 1 and 3 were admitted without objection. Applicant objected 
to a sentence in GE 2. The objection was sustained, and the remainder of the document 
was admitted without objection. Applicant and one witness testified on her behalf. 
Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G. There were no other objections to 
the exhibits offered, and they were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on April 30, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about specific controlled substances that are alleged 
in the SOR. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the request that are supported by source documents from official U.S. 
Government publications. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except the allegation in ¶ 1.a, 
which she partially denied due to the dates alleged. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. She graduated from college in 1998. She married in 2005 
and divorced in 2007. She remarried in 2010. She has two children ages four and six 
years old. She has worked for her present employer, a federal contractor, since October 
2016. Before then, from 2000 to 2016, she worked in different departments at a university. 
(Tr. 23-26; GE 1; AE B)  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in December 2016. 
She was interviewed by a government investigator in January 2018, and completed 
government interrogatories in August 2018. She disclosed and admitted all of her past 
illegal drug use and activity as follows:  
 
Marijuana use with varying frequency from January 1992 to September 
2013. 
 
Nitrous Oxide use on various occasions from February 1992 to June 2016. 
 
Sold Nitrous Oxide in 2007 on at least two occasions. 
 
Mushrooms use with varying frequency from about August 2001 to May 
2013. 
 
Ecstasy use approximately six times from August 2002 to May 2009. 
 
LSD use on various occasions from August 2003 to May 2011. 
 
 
3 
 
 
2C-B, a hallucinogenic, used two times from 2003 to 2004. 
 
2C-I, a hallucinogenic used in July 2003. 
 
Peyote, used in 2004.  
 
Foxy, a hallucinogenic, used in July 2007. 
 
DMT, a hallucinogenic, used in 2008. 
 
Poppers, an inhalant, used in 2009.  
  
 Applicant disputed the date alleged regarding her use of hallucinogenic 
mushrooms. She admitted she knowingly used mushrooms from 2001 to 2013. In June 
2017, she attended a memorial service for a friend. She had previously used mushrooms 
with some of the people who were also in attendance, but she had not seen them for a 
while. There was a spiritual ceremony that included the leader dabbing oil on each 
attendee’s forehead and saying a blessing. The oil had mushroom extract in it. Because 
of the nature of the ceremony, she did not decline the blessing. She disclosed this 
information in her background interview. She testified that at the time, she did not consider 
the potential implications or effects the mushrooms might have on her. She stated after 
receiving the oil dab she did not feel any dramatic effect from the oil, but became aware 
of a very slight altered feeling similar to consuming half of a can of beer. She testified that 
she felt a duty to report this incident during her background interview even though it was 
not an intentional choice at the time to abuse drugs. (Tr. 38-40, 44-50; GE 2, 3) 
 
 Applicant started using marijuana in high school. She estimated that from 1997 to 
2007, she used it about six times a year. She estimated she used marijuana with her 
friends and her spouse from 2008 to 2013, about eight times a year. She used it socially 
and to relax. She estimated she used LSD about eight times from 2003 to 2011. She 
estimated she used Ecstasy about six times from 2002 to 2009. She used Poppers, DMT, 
Foxy, and 2C-B once. She used 2C-I twice. She said that except for her marijuana and 
LSD use, her use of other illegal drugs was before her second marriage. (Tr. 54, 61-75) 
 
Applicant testified that a defining time in her life was when she became a mother 
and it profoundly changed her lifestyle and social community. She does not want anything 
to prevent her from giving her children the best opportunities that she can. Because any 
illegal drug use would prevent her from doing so, she said she stopped using illegal drugs 
in 2013. Becoming a mother also led her to improve her professional life. Since she began 
working for her current employer she has been promoted. (Tr. 27-29, 33, 77-79; GE 1) 
  
Applicant admitted she used Nitrous Oxide until June 2016, a period of time after 
she stopped using other drugs. Because it was legal to obtain, she was unaware it was 
illegal to inhale. It is commonly used in dental and medical procedures and its effect wear 
off safely and quickly. She purchased it twice in 2007 and sold some to friends at parties 
as a convenience. She admitted in her SCA that in hindsight she realized it was probably 
 
4 
 
 
illegal to inhale it. She did not sell it to make a profit, but did make a small one. Her use 
of Nitrous Oxide after having children was to help her relax. She has not used it since 
2016. (Tr. 33-38, 50-54, 66-68, 77-79, 82-83; AE D) 
 
Applicant testified that she does not believe her husband still uses marijuana, but 
has not asked him. He has not used it in their home and they have not used it together 
since 2013. She credibly testified that since becoming a mother her priorities have 
changed, and she is focused on raising her family. She admitted that before having 
children, she exhibited behavior where she sought to find different types of “highs.” (Tr. 
60-61, 66-67, 79-80) 
 
Applicant testified and provided a written statement that she does not intend to use 
illegal drugs in the future. Since becoming a mother she has taken management and 
technical courses to improve herself. She is focused on self-development through 
exercise and martial arts. She testified that she has disassociated herself from her friends 
who use drugs. She avoids places where there may be illegal drugs. Her social activity is 
focused on her two young children and husband. (Tr. 40-41, 71, 77-79; AE E) 
 
 Applicant testified that she has never tested positive for illegal drug use and has 
not been evaluated or diagnosed with a substance abuse disorder. She voluntarily 
disclosed all of her drug use. (Tr. 74-75). 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on her behalf. He has observed her daily for the 
past two and a half years. She is a valued employee and exhibits exceptional talent in her 
field. She shared with him her past drug use. He has not witnessed any indication that 
she continues to use drugs. He trusts her and believes she has exercised good judgment. 
(Tr. 86-91) 
 
 Applicant provided character letters from her manager, a former supervisor for four 
years, and a friend. She is described as honest, knowledgeable, trustworthy, dependable, 
thoughtful, deliberate, and stable. She exhibits a commitment to hard work; exercises 
sound judgment; and since becoming a parent is steadfast in ensuring she is a positive 
role model for her children. (Tr. 31; AE C) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
 
5 
 
 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
The security concern relating to the guideline for drug involvement and substance 
misuse is set out in AG & 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
 
6 
 
 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 25 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any substance misuse; and 
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
  From approximately 1992 to approximately 2016, with varying frequency 
Applicant used illegal drugs as noted above. She sold Nitrous Oxide on two occasions. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome the problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were being used; and (3) providing 
a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant voluntarily disclosed all of her past illegal drugs use in her SCA, 
background interview, and interrogatories. Her testimony was candid and forthcoming. 
She disclosed that after completing her SCA, she attended a memorial service where an 
oil with mushroom extract was dabbed on her forehead. She noticed it gave her a slightly 
altered feeling and in the interest of being totally honest, she disclosed this event to the 
government investigator. Applicant’s past drug use is extensive. I believe she made a 
lifestyle change. I found her testimony credible that she does not intend to use illegal 
drugs in the future. She is aware of the impact future drug use will have on her ability to 
retain her job and its impact on her children. She has disassociated herself from friends 
with whom she used drugs with in the past. She signed a statement of intent to not use 
illegal drugs in the future. She disclosed her past drug use to her supervisor who then 
testified on her behalf. She has maintained an acceptable period of abstinence from illegal 
drug use. Although she was past the age of youthful indiscretion when she continued to 
 
7 
 
 
use illegal drugs and was beyond the experimental stage of drug use, I believe that she 
recognizes the impact that any future illegal drug use and subsequent ramifications could 
have on both her career and her life. I find the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is an intelligent 43-year-old wife, mother, and exceptional employee. She 
has an extensive history of illegal drug use. She credibly testified that the turning point in 
her life was when she became a mother. She has abstained from using illegal drugs for 
an acceptable period of time. Based on her honest disclosures in her SCA, background 
interview, interrogatories, and testimony, I believe illegal drug use is in her past and she 
will not use illegal drugs in the future. The record evidence does not leave me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  For Applicant  
     
 
Conclusion 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
