 
1 
 
                                                              
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
   
     
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01435 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/06/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised under Guideline G and 
Guideline E. He had several alcohol incidents, while holding a security clearance, and 
failed to notify his security officer. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 15, 2016. On 
August 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption and 
Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2018, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge (Answer). The Government was 
ready to proceed on October 19, 2018, and the case was assigned to me on December 
4, 2018. On December 13, 2018, I issued an order to both parties to produce their 
evidence by December 26, 2018, and the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for January 10, 2019. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted, without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C were admitted, without 
objection. I received the completed transcript (Tr.) on January 23, 2019. I held the 
record open until January 17, 2019, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. He timely submitted AE D, which I admit without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
Applicant is a 33-year-old senior consultant who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since August 2012. He requires a security clearance for this 
employment. He was previously granted an interim secret clearance in 2012, which was 
approved in 2014. Applicant is single and has no children. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 2009. (Tr. 9-10, 16-17) 
 
In February 2012, Applicant went to New Orleans for a vacation during Mardi 
Gras. Over the course of the day, he consumed several alcoholic drinks with his friends. 
Applicant continued to drink that night, he became intoxicated, but could not find a 
public restroom. While Applicant was urinating outdoors in a public area, a police officer 
approached him, and gave him a citation for lewd conduct. Applicant hired a local 
attorney to represent him in absentia at his court hearing, and the citation was 
dismissed. (GE 1 at 41; GE 2 at 13; GE 5 at 5; Tr. 17-20, 42-43) 
 
Applicant disclosed the 2012 incident in his 2012 and 2016 SCAs, because he 
was advised to “include anything and everything.” The incident above occurred shortly 
before he completed his first SCA; however, Applicant did not disclose the incident to 
his facility security officer (FSO) or program manager.1 (GE 1 at 41; GE 2 at 13; Tr. 42-
43) 
 
In March 2013, Applicant had plans to attend a National Hockey League (NHL) 
game after work with a coworker, during the middle of the week. That morning when he 
went to work, he left his vehicle outside of a public transportation center in anticipation 
of his evening plans. Applicant consumed three beers at the game, he went to at least 
one bar after the game, and consumed two liquor drinks. (GE 1 at 42; GE 2 at 3, 13-14; 
Tr. 20-23, 44-45) 
 
At the end of the night, Applicant took public transportation to his car and drove 
for approximately five to seven minutes. While he was driving, he felt intoxicated, and 
decided to pull his vehicle over to the side of the road and sleep. He slept for 
approximately an hour, when a police officer knocked on the window of Applicant’s car 
and woke him up. Applicant was sitting in the driver’s seat and the keys were in the 
ignition. Applicant failed the field sobriety tests. He was given a breathalyzer, and his 
blood alcohol content (BAC) was .13%. He was arrested and charged with 
driving/attempting to drive a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol (DUI). 
Applicant’s license was suspended for a period prior to the court hearing. The arresting 
                                                          
1 During his October 2017 government interview, Applicant told the investigator that he had not told his 
parents or coworkers about the 2012 lewd conduct citation. (GE 2 at 13) 
 
3 
 
officer did not appear at Applicant’s court hearing, and the charges were dismissed.2 
(GE 2 at 3, 13-14; GE 3; Tr. 20-23, 44-46) 
 
Applicant testified that after the 2013 arrest, he did not seek counseling or 
treatment, but he changed his behavior for a period of time. He used ride shares and 
stopped drinking for a few months before his court hearing. After the charges were 
dismissed, he resumed the consumption of alcohol. (GE 2 at 14; Tr. 23-24)  
 
In August 2017, Applicant went out for dinner on a work night with a friend and 
consumed a couple of drinks. After dinner they went to the friend’s parents’ house and 
he had approximately two more drinks. He testified that did not intend to drink alcohol, 
but consumed approximately four drinks in four to five hours, and he thought he was 
sober enough to drive. He left the house, drove five minutes, and then pulled over to 
rest. After sleeping for approximately 45 minutes, a police officer approached his vehicle 
and woke him. Applicant was sitting in the driver’s seat with the keys in the ignition. 
Applicant failed the field sobriety tests, and his BAC results were .14%. He was arrested 
and charged with (DUI). The arresting officer did not come to his court hearing, and the 
charges were dismissed in December 2017. (GE 2 at 3, 14-15, 17; GE 4; Tr. 24-29, 48) 
 
Applicant did not seek treatment or counseling after his third alcohol-related 
arrest. He testified that he was relieved that the charges were dropped, he reflected on 
the incident, stopped drinking for a few weeks, but did not believe that alcohol classes 
would have been “beneficial.” Applicant resumed drinking after the 2017 DUI charges 
were dismissed in late 2017. (GE 2 at 6; Tr. 28-31, 33-34, 47, 49)  
 
In his September 2018 Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated he intended to 
seek an alcohol evaluation, and he was abstaining from the consumption of alcohol. On 
January 1, 2019, he paid for an alcohol and drug evaluation from a private facility. The 
assessment found that Applicant does not need treatment. (Answer; AE A; AE D) 
 
Applicant testified that he continued to drink after the SOR was issued, and he 
last consumed alcohol a few weeks before the hearing. After each of the incidents 
alleged in the SOR, Applicant told government investigators that he intended to modify 
his consumption of alcohol. (Answer; GE 5 at 5; GE 2; AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 15, 32-33, 
35-37) 
 
Applicant’s two DUI arrests occurred on work nights. He testified that on both 
occasions, he drove, in part, because it was a work night, and he wanted to get home to 
be responsible, sleep, and then go to work the next day. Following both arrests, 
Applicant was taken into custody, and his vehicle was towed. He was released early in 
the morning on both occasions and called into work as sick, and did not disclose the 
arrests to his FSO. In his notes that he prepared for the hearing, Applicant stated that 
he “wasn’t really driving” before the 2013 and 2017 arrests. (AE C at 1; Tr. 21, 25; 62-
63) 
                                                          
2 During his October 2017 government interview, Applicant told the investigator that he had not told his 
parents or coworkers about the 2013 arrest. (GE 2 at 14) 
 
 
4 
 
Throughout his six and half years of employment for his company, Applicant has 
attended yearly security clearance training. He was aware that he had a duty to report 
derogatory or adverse information to his employer. Applicant testified that he was 
unsure if he was required to report information prior to a final determination and if he 
was required to report the two DUI arrests despite the dismissal of the charges. There is 
no evidence that Applicant sought clarification on this issue. (AE C; Tr. 37-39)  
 
Applicant did not report either of the DUI arrests to his FSO when the arrests 
occurred. He testified that the arrests were embarrassing, and he was worried about his 
job. Applicant did disclose the 2013 and 2017 arrests to the government investigator 
during his interview in October 2017. (GE 1 at 41-42; Tr. 39-41, 46-47, 50-56)  
 
Applicant presented a reference letter from his program manager. She found him 
to be reliable and effective in his role at the company. (AE B; Tr. 15)  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence establish two disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 22: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(b) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
 
6 
 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant had three alcohol-related incidents between February 2012 and August 
2017. The last two incidents were arrests for DUI, and they occurred while he held a 
security clearance.  All three of the arrests were dismissed, as a result Applicant did not 
face any legal consequences for his behavior. His multiple claims over the years that he 
changed his behavior and consumption of alcohol are unconvincing, due to the 
frequency and number of arrests. The passage of time since the 2017 alcohol incident 
is insufficient to mitigate the underlying concerns.  
 
 Applicant’s argument that he was not really driving before the 2013 and 2017 
arrests, demonstrate that he has not acknowledged the magnitude of his bad choices. 
His brief periods of abstinence in preparation for his court cases do not mitigate his 
behavior as well. Finally, due to the recency of Applicant’s 2017 arrest, he has not yet 
established a pattern of responsible use of alcohol.  
 
 Prior to Applicant’s hearing, he sought an alcohol assessment, which determined 
that no treatment was recommended. He did not seek counseling or treatment after 
either of the DUI arrests. AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), and 23(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
 
7 
 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable in this case: 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
In this case, Applicant claimed he was unaware that he had a duty to report his 
arrests to his FSO when they occurred, regardless of the final determination. Given 
Applicant’s educational and professional background and his expressed concern about 
his employment due to the arrests, Applicant deliberately did not disclose his multiple 
alcohol-related incidents to his FSO. 
AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
mitigating. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose derogatory information regarding his alcohol-related 
incidents to his FSO. Applicant admitted that he was embarrassed by his behavior and 
concerned about his employment. Although, he disclosed his arrest to the government 
investigator, his failure to be forthright to his employer is concerning. There is no 
evidence that the government was aware of the 2013 arrest before Applicant’s security 
clearance was granted in 2014.  
 
Applicant made deliberate choices to keep his employer in the dark regarding his 
behavior, raising the concern that he is unreliable and untrustworthy and calling into 
question his judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. This 
 
8 
 
concern has not been mitigated by the passage of time. Neither of the mitigating 
conditions apply in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
favorable character evidence. 
 
 Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Alcohol Consumption:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
