 
 
 
 
1 
                               
 
                               
                    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                   
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS  
           
                                       
                                       
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01057 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. DeAngelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/07/2019 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement and substance misuse, and 
personal conduct security concerns, related to his use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance, and his failure to fully disclose it on his security clearance application 
and during an investigative interview. Based on the pleadings and exhibits, national 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On August 10, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On July 2, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG) effective within the DoD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant filed an Answer to the SOR on September 11, 2018, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 20, 2019, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing seven Items. Applicant received the FORM on March 27, 2019. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not provide a response 
to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Hence, all 
Items are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 29, 2019.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 2.a, and 2.b. He 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d.1 (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is divorced twice and has two adult children. He 
served in the Army from 1980 to 2004, and received an honorable discharge. He held a 
security clearance while in the Army. He has worked for federal contractors since 2004. 
In 2014, he was granted an interim security clearance. (Item 4) 
 
 In his August 2017 SCA, Applicant stated that in June 2017 he used marijuana for 
the first time to alleviate arthritic pain. He said his physician was going to issue him a 
medical certificate to use it, so he decided to try it before that. On June 30, 2017, his 
employer notified him that he tested positive for marijuana on his recent drug urinalysis 
and was required to enroll in a mandatory Employee Assistance Program (EAP) starting 
July 6, 2017. He was placed on a leave of absence from July 3, to August 2, 2017, and 
required to complete some form of treatment.2 He stated that he is now required to 
participate in a five-year drug treatment program, beginning on July 27, 2017, and 
continuing to July 27, 2022. He explained that his employer requires him to be drug free 
during those years. (Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
   During a December 2017 interview, Applicant told an investigator that on June 23, 
2017, he used marijuana to relieve arthritic pain in his back. He said his doctor had offered 
to prescribe him a medical marijuana card, but Applicant refused because it was 
prohibited under federal law and his employer’s policies. He stated that on June 26, 2017, 
he was randomly selected for a drug urinalysis. On June 30, 2017, his employer notified 
him that he tested positive for marijuana and was ordered not to return to work, beginning 
on July 3, 2017. He was off work for 30 days and had to take another drug urinalysis on 
July 24, 2017. Those results were negative and he returned to work on August 2, 2017. 
(Item 6) 
                                            
1 Applicant denied that he tested positive for marijuana on June 28, 2017, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
He admitted that it was July 5, 2017, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. He asserted he only tested positive once 
during the June to July 2017 timeframe. There is confusion in this record as to the correct date of his positive 
urinalysis in 2017. I find that the date of the positive drug screen was in June 2017, which is consistent with 
the preponderance of the evidence, including his SCA, interview, and interrogatories. (Item 6)  
 
2 There is no information describing the components of this mandatory treatment program. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 On May 10, 2018, a government investigator obtained Applicant’s medical records. 
The records documented that Applicant had been using marijuana from approximately 
October 2015 until July 2017, during which time he held a security clearance. According 
to the medical records, Applicant’s physician prescribed him Tramadol, and required him 
to refrain from alcohol or marijuana use while using this drug. On October 14, 2015, he 
tested positive for marijuana. Subsequently, Applicant acknowledged to his physician in 
writing that he would not use alcohol or marijuana and agreed to random drug testing 
ordered by his physician to confirm abstinence. Despite his promise, he tested positive 
for both marijuana and alcohol on January 22, 2016, and March 22, 2016. He later 
reported to his physician that he discontinued marijuana use, but his subsequent drug 
test in June 2017 again tested positive for marijuana. (Items 3, 7) 
 
 On June 12, 2018, Applicant completed a set of government interrogatories. He 
reported that he had used marijuana only once, on June 26, 2017. He admitted that he 
failed a drug test, but stated he had no intention of using marijuana again. He submitted 
a Certificate of Completion of an eight-hour drug and alcohol awareness class in July 
2017, while on his leave of absence. He wrote that he had recently taken cortisone shots 
for his arthritic pain and participated in physical therapy, both of which were alleviating 
his pain. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
 
 
 
 
4 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 AG ¶ 24 describes the concerns related to drug involvement and substance 
misuse: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 Applicant used marijuana from October 2015 until June 2017, and tested positive 
for using the illegal drug in October 2015, January 2016, and June 2017. He was working 
for a federal contractor at that time and held a security clearance. The evidence 
established the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 26 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline. Three may potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence to establish mitigation under any of the above 
conditions. He used marijuana from October 2015 into June 2017, and the last alleged 
incident having occurred about two years ago. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
that his illegal use of marijuana happened under unusual circumstances, such that it does 
not cast doubt on his current trustworthiness. He consistently lied to the Government 
about the extent of his marijuana use during this investigation, until the Government 
reviewed his medical records, which documented a history of marijuana abuse that was 
against, not consistent with, his doctor’s advice. He did not voluntarily admit or 
acknowledge that he has a drug problem. He participated in an EAP, which included an 
eight-hour substance awareness course. There is no other evidence describing the 
elements of that program or indicating that he was evaluated and received a favorable 
prognosis from a duly qualified medical professional while participating in a treatment 
program or complying with aftercare requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant deliberately concealed information from the Government in his August 
2017 SCA and during his December 2017 interview about the extent of his illegal 
marijuana use and the fact that he had tested positive for the drug on two occasions prior 
to his June 2017 drug-related suspension. The evidence establishes the above 
disqualifying conditions and indicates that he intentionally omitted requested relevant 
information concerning his recent drug abuse. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Four may 
potentially apply: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
 
 
7 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
Applicant presented insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under any of the 
above conditions. He failed to be candid and forthright about his history of marijuana use 
when he completed his August 2017 SCA, during his December 2017 interview, and in 
response to interrogatories in June 2018. He did not disclose or acknowledge his 
marijuana use problem until after the Government obtained his medical records 
documenting his history of marijuana abuse. He knew using marijuana was against 
federal policy and his employer’s rules, and admitted that during his interview. He held a 
security clearance between 2015 and 2017, when he used marijuana and tested positive 
for it. His intentional omission of requested information on three occasions is not a minor 
offense, and casts serious doubt on his judgment and trustworthiness. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and E in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a mature man who honorably served in the Army for about 24 years. 
He held a security clearance during that time. After leaving the Army in 2004, he began 
 
 
 
 
8 
working for federal contractors and obtained an interim security clearance. He knew using 
marijuana was illegal, and violated his employer’s and the federal government’s policies, 
especially while holding a security clearance. His use of marijuana and attempts to 
conceal it during this investigative process raise serious questions about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. He further agreed not to use alcohol or marijuana while under the care 
of his physician and taking prescribed medication, and breached that agreement. 
Applicant failed to demonstrate rehabilitation, significant behavioral changes, or mitigate 
the security concerns raised. Overall, the evidence raises serious doubt as to Applicant’s 
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:           AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
                          Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:       Against Applicant 
      Subparagraph 1.e:         For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:           AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   
     
                               
                 Against Applicant 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
