 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
   
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02468 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
June 18, 2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On April 7, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP).  
(Government Exhibit 1.) On October 22, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 14, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 25, 2019.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on March 21, 
2019, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 8, 2019. The Government 
offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered two exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s 
Exhibits A and B, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own 
behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 15, 2019. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 37 years old.  He is married and has two children.  He has a 
Bachelor’s of Science degree in Electronics and Electrical Engineering. He is employed 
by a defense contractor as a Test Engineer/Hardware.  He is seeking to obtain a 
security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified fourteen delinquent debts totaling almost $400,000.  
Applicant denies each of the allegations set forth in the SOR, except 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., and 
1.n.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated July 25, 2017; and October 2, 2018, reflect 
that the debts are still owing.  (Government Exhibits 2 and 3.) 
       
 Applicant was born in Kampala, Uganda in September 1982.  He came to the 
United States as a teenager in March 1999.  His mother was granted asylum here, and 
he and his siblings were allowed to come with her.  Applicant became a naturalized 
United States citizen in 2003.  Applicant wanted to pursue the American dream of 
attending college and getting a good job to support his family.  He took out student 
loans to pay for college with hopes that his education would help him in his career.  He 
planned to pay off the loans when he started work.  He also co-signed for some of his 
wife’s student loans and his brother’s student loans.  He also has some delinquent 
consumer debt and a few delinquent medical bills.  He attributes some of his delinquent 
debt to long periods of unemployment.  Applicant was unemployed from February 2013 
to March 2014; October 2014 to February 2015; and November 2015 to January 2017. 
Applicant had difficulty finding work and even worked as a truck driver in order to make 
ends meet.         
 
 Applicant started working for his current employer in 2017.  He stated that he has 
never received financial counseling but he has contacted a credit counselor to help him 
with his delinquent debt, but has not yet hired them.  (Tr. p. 53.)  Applicant has not been 
able to afford to pay his delinquent debt and most of the debt listed in the SOR remains 
owing.  He plans is to start by paying the smaller debt first, and when those debts are 
resolved, he will begin with the others.  Applicant received a letter from one of his 
student loan creditors who informed him that to avoid wage garnishment he was to 
establish a payment plan by September 2018.  Applicant thought that it would be better 
to simply allow the creditor to garnish his wages.  His wages are currently being 
 
3 
 
garnished in the amount of $700 monthly to pay the debts set forth in allegation 1.d and 
1.e., of the SOR, which total approximately $81,000.       
 
 After taxes and the garnishment, Applicant states that he nets about $3,600 
monthly, $1,800 per pay period.  (Tr. p. 67.)  His wife now works part-time.  After they 
have paid their regular monthly expenses including rent, car insurance, utilities, food, 
clothing, telephones, child care, etc., they have some money left over that Applicant 
puts into his savings accounts.  He currently has about $10,000 in a savings account 
and $20,000 in his retirement account.  (Tr. p. 72-73.)   
 
 The following delinquent debts remain owing: 
 
1.a. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a student loan account that was charged off in 
the approximate amount of $105,111.           
 
1.b.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a student loan account that was charged off 
in the approximate amount of $62,090.    
 
1.c.   Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $59,844.          
 
1.d.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed in collection in 
the approximate amount of $54,828. Applicant states that this debt is being paid through 
payroll garnishment in the amount of $700 per month.       
       
1.e.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $24,604.  Applicant states that this debt is being paid through 
payroll garnishment in the amount of $700 per month.       
 
1.f.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the in the 
approximate amount of $9,658.   
 
1.g. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $1,811.          
 
1.h.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $1,491.        
 
1.i.   Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the amount of approximate amount of $489.        
 
1.j.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account in the approximate amount 
of $446.             
 
1.k.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $121.        
 
 
4 
 
1.l.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $66,058.   
 
1.m.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $10,000.        
 
1.n.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $6,762.   
 
 Two debts owed to one creditor set forth in allegations 1.d., and 1.e., are being 
paid through wage garnishment.  Applicant’s remaining delinquent debt is still 
outstanding.  Applicant testified that he hopes to get his finances in order and be able to 
pay his delinquent debts soon.  His career plan is to work in the defense industry and 
utilize the skills he acquired through his formal education.    
 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is excessively indebted and has not made any effort to resolve his 
debts.  Of the fourteen debts listed in the SOR, one is being paid through garnishment 
 
6 
 
of his wages.  Even his smaller debts have not been paid.  The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations guideline 
are potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and   
   
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant’s financial distress has been partially caused by the long period of 
unemployment he has experienced.  Even so, since obtaining full-time employment with 
a defense contractor in 2017, Applicant has done little to show that he can or will 
resolve his debts.  He states that he is planning to hire a credit counselor, yet he has 
not done so yet.  There has been little or no movement with his debts since the SOR 
was issued.  One creditor is being paid through wage garnishment.  Applicant has not 
set up payment plans that he is following, nor has he paid off any of the outstanding 
debt.  There is no clear evidence in the record that he has acted reasonably and 
responsibly under the circumstances.  His actions reflect unreliability, untrustworthiness, 
and poor judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a., through 1.n.   Against Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
