 
1 
 
 
                                
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
      
       
           
             
 
                              
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02154 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/05/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 12, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 25, 2019. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 12, 
2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 16, 2019. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through R. There were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were admitted into 
evidence. The record was held open until May 15, 2019, to allow Applicant to provide 
additional exhibits. He submitted AE S through W, which were admitted without 
objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript on April 26, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶ 1.a through 1.e. He denied the 
SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.f through 1.h. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He graduated from high school in 2005 and enlisted in 
the military. He served in the military for almost ten years and was honorably discharged 
as a staff sergeant (E-6) in 2015. Applicant deployed to Iraq in 2007 (5 months) and in 
2008-2009 (8 months). He deployed to Afghanistan in 2010 (8 months), 2011-2012 (7 
months), and 2013-2014 (9 months). He participated in many major campaigns in Iraq 
and Afghanistan serving as a helicopter crew chief. He earned the following medals and 
ribbons: Air Medals (six awards); Navy-Marine Corps Achievement Medal (two awards); 
Presidential Unit Citation-Navy; Navy Unit Commendation Medal; Navy Meritorious Unit 
Commendation; Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal (3 awards); National Defense 
Service Medal; Afghanistan Campaign Medal (two stars); Iraq Campaign Medal (two 
stars), Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Sea Service Deployment ribbon (five 
stars); NATO Medal; Certificate of Commendation-Individual Award; Letter or 
Appreciation; Meritorious Mast; Expert Rifle Badge; Expert Pistol Badge; and the Naval 
Air Crew Insignia Badge. He held a security clearance while serving in the military.2 
 
Applicant married in 2016. He has a two-year-old child and another child is due to 
be born in June 2019. He also has a daughter from a previous relationship who is 14 
years old.3  
 
 Applicant’s decision to leave the military was due to the well-being of his teenage 
daughter who was living with her mother. The mother had been repeatedly arrested, and 
Applicant was contacted in February 2015 by child protective services regarding the 
welfare of his daughter. He sought legal advice and was told by his attorney that if 
Applicant continued to serve in the military and with his likely continued overseas 
deployments, there were minimal avenues for Applicant to pursue regarding obtaining 
custody of his child. Applicant was concerned about his child’s health and safety because 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email. 
 
2 Tr. 22-25, 89-90; GE 1; AE W. 
 
3 Tr. 26. 
 
 
3 
 
 
the child’s mother had drug and alcohol problems. Based on these factors, he decided to 
not reenlist so he could better address the matters related to his daughter.4  
 
 In March 2016, Applicant and his wife moved to another state. His wife has a sister 
who has cerebral palsy and needs 24-hour care. His wife had custody of her sister and 
was providing her care. The purpose of the move was to transfer custody of her sister’s 
care to her mother, living in the state where they were moving. Her sister’s financial 
disability assistance was to be also transferred to the mother. Applicant was working at a 
car dealership.5 When they moved he was able to stay with the same car company, but 
he was not earning sufficient income. He attempted to obtain a different job in the new 
state at the large military base where there were numerous federal contractors, but was 
unsuccessful. The cost of the move impacted his family’s finances. The process of 
transferring custody of his wife’s sister to her mother took longer than expected. Once 
custody was transferred, Applicant and his wife moved again in August 2016 to 
Applicant’s home state so he could improve his prospects of finding better employment. 
The cost of this move further impacted his finances.6 
 
 While Applicant was working for the car company, his child support was 
automatically deducted from his pay. He had always maintained medical insurance for 
his daughter, which had been required. It cost approximately $130. The car dealer 
required he purchase insurance through their plan, which cost $320 bi-weekly, and was 
the only way he could comply with the medical insurance required by the state for his 
daughter. He was also paying $320 in monthly child support. Applicant resigned from this 
job in June 2016 and went to work for a different car dealer, so he could reduce his 
medical insurance costs for his daughter. During the time he was required to pay the 
excessive amount for medical insurance, he fell behind on some bills. Also noted is that 
during the time the car dealer was withholding money for medical insurance, Applicant 
was still paying the premium for the separate insurance policy he had always maintained 
for his daughter. Essentially, he was paying for two separate medical insurance policies. 
He continued to be underemployed with the new car dealer, but he had to remain in the 
state until his wife’s sister’s custody transfer was completed.7  
 
 When Applicant moved to his home state in August 2016, he did not have a job. It 
took two months for him to get a job. In October 2016, he got a job as operations manager 
at a health club. His annual income was $42,000. In November 2016, the mother of his 
daughter obtained a modification of the child support order increasing it from $320 to 
$560. This did not include the $130 he was paying monthly for medical insurance. 
                                                          
4 Tr. 25-29.  
 
5 Tr. 28-32. Applicant began working for the car dealership part-time before he was discharged from the 
military. The child support for his daughter was being deducted from his military pay. When he began the 
part-time job, the state incorrectly deducted child support from his pay. So he was paying double the 
required amount. He eventually got the matter corrected.  
 
6 Tr. 29, 32-34. 
 
7 Tr. 35-42. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that the mother of his daughter has four other children and none of their 
fathers were paying child support.8  
 
The state where Applicant now lives is the same state where his daughter resides. 
He received calls from the state’s child protective services informing him that his daughter 
was cutting herself and syringes were found in her backpack. Applicant withdrew money 
from his Thrift Saving Plan (TSP) and paid the penalty. He paid a $3,500 retainer to his 
attorney so he could obtain full custody of his daughter. He was driving every other week 
to visit his daughter and spending between $80 and $100 for the trip, and to purchase 
necessities for her that her mother was not providing. His attorney advised him that he 
would be required to show he had a good and stable home environment before pursuing 
custody of his daughter. He used the remaining money of his TSP to pay the expenses 
to move into a home in February 2017. During this time, he paid some of his smaller 
delinquent bills.9  
 
In March 2017, Applicant’s wife miscarried. They incurred unplanned medical 
expenses that were not covered by insurance. This impacted their finances.10  
 
In August 2017, Applicant got a better paying job with a government contractor. In 
November 2017, Applicant went to court to obtain full custody of his daughter. His 
daughter asked him to pursue custody. He was granted custody. The mother was granted 
supervised visitation. The mother refused to relinquish custody despite the court order 
and the daughter’s wishes that she live with Applicant. In December 2017, the police 
enforced the court order. The police took her from school. His daughter did not have any 
of her belongings. Applicant had to purchase clothes and supplies for his daughter. The 
mother is required to pay $320 a month for child support and $120 for insurance. She has 
never made a payment.11  
 
In February 2018, the mother of Applicant’s daughter filed for custody of their 
daughter. Applicant paid a $2,500 retainer to his lawyer. As of the date of his hearing, he 
was waiting for a court date. He testified that his daughter does not want to return to the 
mother’s home. Applicant also noted that there are criminal charges pending against the 
mother’s husband, who she no longer lives with, for sexual assault on Applicant’s 
daughter.12  
 
Applicant testified that he has attempted to manage his finances throughout these 
extraordinary events that have had a major effect on him. His wife is pregnant and due to 
numerous complications, they have incurred additional medical expenses that continue 
                                                          
8 Tr. 34, 41-45; AE Q. 
 
9 Tr. 45-46. 
 
10 Tr. 52-53. 
 
11 Tr. 47-51; AE O, R. 
 
12 Tr. 46, 53-56. 
 
5 
 
 
to impact their finances. He indicated that the expendable income that remains at the end 
of each month has been used to pay the additional medical expenses that are not fully 
covered by their medical insurance. He prioritized paying the medical bills for his wife. His 
wife is due to deliver the baby in June. Applicant is hopeful that after a period of 
adjustment, their medical expenses will be reduced, and their expendable income can be 
used to resolve more of their debts. He also has prepaid $4,000 for the upcoming medical 
bills for the birth of their child. He provided receipts to show his payments.13  
 
Applicant enlisted in the National Guard in April 2019. He began paying $281 
monthly for medical insurance through Tricare. He explained that he is entitled to use 
Tricare, but must pay monthly premiums. He anticipates being reimbursed from Tricare 
for the amount he prepaid for upcoming medical bills associated with the birth of his child. 
He plans to use the reimbursement money to make payments toward other debts. 
Applicant admits that he had intended to make more payments towards his debts, but the 
intervening child custody costs and his wife’s pregnancy complications prevented him 
from doing so.14  
 
Applicant testified that he has paid about $8,000 toward medical bills associated 
with his wife’s conditions and a credit card in her name. In his new job, he earns about 
$79,000. Because he enlisted in the National Guard, he anticipates receiving a $7,500 
bonus in the future. He is also attending college and receives a Pell Grant. His tuition is 
paid through the GI Bill. He and his wife have one car. His mother purchased a vehicle 
for Applicant, and he pays her the monthly amount of the loan. Applicant receives about 
$500 a month in Veteran’s disability compensation. He uses this amount to pay the car 
note and insurance. He stated that due to the cost of childcare, it is not financially sensible 
to have his wife work. He has prioritized paying his wife’s medical bills.15   
 
Applicant has been unable to begin repaying the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d due 
to the intervening family matters in his life. He intends to start making payments of $200 
toward the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d once he can determine where to send the money. He 
credibly stated that he intends to begin payments on the other debt after his wife gives 
birth and their additional medical expenses are reduced.16  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is for a vehicle lease that Applicant surrendered. He has 
discussed a settlement agreement with the creditor. He intends to begin paying this debt 
after the birth of his child.17  
 
                                                          
13 Tr. 66-69; AE I, J, K. 
 
14 Tr. 65-67; AE S. 
 
15 Tr. 75-82. 
 
16 Tr. 56-59, 61-64, 69-70; AE S. 
 
17 Tr. 59-61, 69-70; AE S, T. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has one payment remaining on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He is resolving 
this debt. He testified that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h are for the same debt with ¶ 
1.e being the collection company for the original creditor in ¶ 1.h. He resolved this debt in 
March 2017. It is not reflected on his most recent credit reports.18 Applicant testified he 
resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. They are not reflected on his most recent credit 
reports and are resolved.19  
 
Applicant provided documents to show he was underemployed while working for 
the car dealerships in 2015 and 2016, and he was unemployed for several months 
between his moves. He also provided a copy of his budget. He does not have any credit 
cards. All of his monthly expenses are current.20 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
18 Tr. 72-74; GE 3, 4; AE L, U, V. The debt is on his September 2017 credit report, but not the August 2018 
or May 2019 credit reports. 
 
19 Tr. 61-64, 72-74; GE 4; AE U, V. 
 
20 Tr. 82-85; GE 1; AE C, D, E, M, N, O, T. 
 
7 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts, which began accruing in approximately 2015. He 
has been unable to timely pay them, until recently. There is sufficient evidence to support 
the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are attributed to several major life crises, which he 
had little or no control over. He was serving in the military when he made a decision that 
for the safety and health of his daughter he would not reenlist. He responsibly sought 
custody of his daughter. He had to hire an attorney and establish a stable home. His wife 
had a miscarriage and there were medical debts not covered by insurance. She is 
presently pregnant and has significant medical issues that are not fully covered by 
insurance. Applicant and his wife moved so they could transfer custody and care of his 
wife’s disabled sister to her mother. His wife had been providing all of her sister’s care. 
Applicant had periods of unemployment and underemployment. His employer required 
him to purchase costly medical insurance through their plan, which meant he was paying 
for two separate insurance policies for his daughter. He and his wife moved so Applicant 
could improve his employment opportunities. When he was awarded custody of his child, 
after police intervention, she went to live with Applicant. She had no belongings, so 
Applicant had to purchase her necessities. Her mother is seeking custody of the daughter, 
and Applicant has again incurred legal expenses. All of these events impacted Applicant’s 
finances and were beyond his control.  
 
 Applicant has acted responsibly by moving to find a better paying job; joining the 
National Guard so he will receive a financial bonus and be eligible for less expensive 
medical insurance; and prioritizing his wife’s medical bills by prepaying them. The 
circumstances that have affected Applicant’s finances are unlikely to recur and do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant has not 
ignored his debts. He has paid some smaller debts and he intends to begin repaying the 
larger ones after his child is born and his finances are more stable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) 
apply. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies. 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He honorably served our country in war and had 
numerous overseas deployments. His reason for not reenlisting, after almost ten years of 
service, was because he was concerned for his daughter’s health and safety. He spent a 
considerable amount of money to obtain legal custody of his daughter, and subsequently 
provide basic necessities for her after he gained custody. The mother is not paying her 
court ordered child support for their daughter, and instead is taking Applicant to court to 
regain custody.  
 
Applicant’s wife was providing full-time care for her disabled sister. Applicant and 
his wife incurred moving expenses so they could transfer the care of her sister back to 
her mother. He was underemployed and unemployed. They again incurred moving 
expenses when they moved so he could find better employment prospects. His wife 
suffered a miscarriage, and some of the medical expenses were not covered. She 
presently has a high-risk pregnancy, and Applicant has prioritized the payment of her 
medical expenses. He paid some of his delinquent debts, but others remain. He enlisted 
in the National Guard and will receive a financial bonus. He is now eligible for less costly 
medical care through Tricare and should be reimbursed for medical expenses he prepaid. 
He plans to use these resources to address his remaining debts.  
 
This is not a situation in which Applicant has acted irresponsibly or ignored his 
financial obligations. Applicant has made responsible and mature decisions concerning 
 
10 
 
 
complex life events. Under the circumstances, he has managed to pay most of his 
expenses, protect his daughter by obtaining custody of her, and made his wife and unborn 
child’s health a priority. I found his testimony credible and believe he will repay the 
remaining delinquent debts. I do not have questions about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness, as exhibited by his exemplary military service for ten years. He has met 
his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline 
F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  For Applicant  
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
