1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case: 18-01577 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/06/2019 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant owed more than $38,500 in delinquent consumer debts. He settled one 
small credit card account for 45% of the balance due, but demonstrated insufficient efforts 
or means to resolve his remaining delinquencies or establish rehabilitation. Resulting 
security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
national security eligibility is denied.  
Statement of Case 
On March 2, 2017, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 4.) On June 18, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F: Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position, that became 
effective for all Executive Branch agencies on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on July 6, 2018, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 3.) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), containing eight Items. A complete copy of the FORM was mailed to Applicant 
on October 24, 2018, and received by him on November 1, 2018. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant requested 
an extension of time to submit his written FORM response until December 17, 2018, and 
that extension was granted by Department Counsel. Applicant did not submit any other 
material in response to the FORM, did not file any objection to its contents, and did not 
request additional time to respond beyond the extended deadline of December 17, 2018. 
Items 1 through 8 are admitted in evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and married, with twin children who were born in January 
2014. He earned a high school diploma in May 1998, and a bachelor’s degree from an 
online university in May 2015. He has been employed by a defense contractor since April 
2014, and is seeking to continue the security clearance he has held since 2007 during his 
employment with several defense contractors. He was honorably discharged in February 
2007, after serving for almost eight years in the Marine Corps Reserve. (Item 4.)  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the four delinquent credit card and consumer loan debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. These unpaid accounts totaled $23,361; were 
opened by Applicant between September 2014 and March 2015; and became delinquent 
in 2016 or early 2017. (Items 3, 4, 5, 7.) 
 
 The fifth SOR-alleged debt (¶ 1.b) involved a contract that Applicant signed in 
March 2015 for a loan to purchase a car. He denied responsibility for repayment of the 
loan because, on some unspecified date, another person had “established a simple 
contract” with him to take possession of the car and make the remaining loan payments. 
Applicant asserted that this undocumented agreement absolved him of his contractual 
responsibility to the seller. However, the other person stopped making the loan payments 
in May 2016, then returned to live with his family in Mexico. The accident-damaged car 
was eventually located by the lender and repossessed. Applicant offered no evidence 
that the creditor, from whom he borrowed money to buy the car, agreed to absolve him 
of his contractual obligations. The charged-off past-due balance of $15,231 remains 
unresolved and actively listed on Appellant’s most recent credit report. (Items 3, 5, 7.)  
 
 On July 5, 2018, the day before submitting his response to the SOR, Applicant 
made a payment of $608.68 to the collection agency that had acquired the charged-off 
delinquent $1,352 credit card debt from his original major-bank creditor. Applicant opened 
this account in January 2015, and stopped making his required payments in September 
2015. The collection agency accepted Applicant’s partial payment in full satisfaction of 
the debt, which was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt is now resolved. (Items 1, 3, 5, 7.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies to financial strains arising out of his 
November 2014 marital separation. However, he failed to describe or document any 
causal relationship between that separation and the debts. He opened the largest 
unsecured personal loan debt ($17,149 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a) in December 2014, which 
was after the separation had already occurred. His second largest delinquency (the 
$15,231 charged-off car loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b) was opened in March 2015, some 
four months after the separation. On his March 2, 2017 e-QIP, Applicant reported his 
marital status as, “Separated,” since, “11/11/2014 (Estimated).” However, he also 
reported that he had resided in the home he owns since June 2010, which has the same 
address at which he reported his wife and two children were then living. Applicant 
provided no evidence of extra expenses from maintaining separate residences, of other 
costs beyond his control, or of reasonable action to manage such issues. (Item 3.)   
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling. He did not submit budgetary 
income or expense figures from which to analyze his future ability to meet family living 
expenses while resolving his delinquencies. Applicant offered no evidence concerning 
the level of responsibility his duties entail in his defense contractor work, or his track 
record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security 
procedures. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person, 
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant incurred more than $38,500 in consumer debts in late 2014 and 2015 
that he stopped paying in 2016 and 2017, despite earning his regular income during and 
since this period. He provided insufficient explanation or financial information to clarify 
whether this irresponsibility stemmed from inability or unwillingness to pay these 
 
 
5 
 
 
voluntarily assumed obligations These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the 
resulting security concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt over the past five years is substantial, and 
his financial irresponsibility is ongoing. His failure to demonstrate substantial progress 
toward resolving four of the SOR-alleged debts in a meaningful way creates ongoing 
concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no reasonable 
basis to conclude that such problems will not continue or recur. Mitigation was not 
established under AG ¶ 20(a). 
  
Applicant did not show that either his temporary marital separation or his 
delinquent debts arose from circumstances beyond his control. Nor did he demonstrate 
that he acted responsibly under such circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG 
¶ 20(b).  
Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling or budget information 
establishing his solvency going forward. He failed to demonstrate that these problems, in 
aggregate, are being brought under control; or that a good-faith effort toward resolution 
has actually been undertaken. After receiving the SOR, he spent $608.68 to settle a 
 
 
6 
 
 
delinquent credit card debt of $1,352. That debt is mitigated. His attempt to dispute his 
ongoing liability for the car loan he opened in 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.b) was neither reasonable 
nor substantiated by any documentation. Whether believed or not, this proffered 
explanation casts serious doubt on Applicant’s judgment in either event. Accordingly, he 
did not establish meaningful mitigation of the security concerns under the provisions of 
AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), or 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $37,000 in delinquent debt, 
and has no meaningful track record of being able to resolve them or avoid new problems. 
The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished, and 
rehabilitation was not demonstrated. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed 
to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Financial 
Considerations guideline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information or to hold a 
sensitive position is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
