 
1 
                                         
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
    
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 18-00748 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/04/2019 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). She made significant progress resolving her delinquent debts and is 
clearly committed to repaying all of her outstanding medical accounts. Her finances are 
under control, and future financial problems are unlikely to recur. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 5, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). On 
August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
On September 14, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, attached five pages of 
supporting documentation, and requested a hearing. On February 28, 2019, the case 
was assigned to me. On March 5, 2019, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
                                         
 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for March 20, 2019. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits, Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1-3, and Applicant offered four exhibits, Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D. There 
were no objections, and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. On April 1, 
2019, DOHA received the hearing transcript. Applicant timely submitted a monthly 
budget, (AE E), and the record closed on April 22, 2019.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. She denied owing the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.p, claiming these debts had been paid. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 36 years old. She is married and has one child, age three. She 
graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 2004. She started working for her current employer 
in June 2017. Her job title is security officer, and she does not currently possess a DOD 
security clearance. (Tr. 20-21; GE 1) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant encountered financial issues when she became pregnant with her son in 
2015. She was underemployed at the time, and she did not have adequate health 
insurance coverage. She required medical care throughout the pregnancy due to serious 
medical complications. Immediately after her son’s birth, her son also required medical 
care. She did not make sufficient income to pay for the medical bills, as she was making 
just enough to pay her monthly expenses. She applied for Medicare twice, but she was 
denied both times. Her medical bills were referred for collection. (Tr. 20-23; AE B; SOR 
Response) 
 
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling $42,683. One delinquent account is 
an unpaid utility account in the amount of $50, and the remaining 15 accounts are for 
unpaid medical services. Applicant makes approximately $4 an hour more with her 
current employer, and the record establishes the status of her accounts as follows: (Tr. 
21) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.l, and 1.n allege medical accounts referred to the 
same collection agency. The total amount of these debts is about $38,107. At the time 
she responded to the SOR, the supporting documentation showed she had paid off 
approximately $3,000, with the total amount owed to the collection agency then 
$35,120.54. She also disclosed that the collection agency offered her a settlement if she 
paid $7,000. Applicant contacted this creditor to see if she could apply her anticipated 
income tax refund towards the settlement amount. At the time of the hearing, she was 
uncertain how much her 2018 tax refund totaled. She intends to continue working with 
this creditor until this debt is settled, or fully resolved. Sufficient evidence shows that these 
medical accounts are currently being resolved. (Tr. 27-29; SOR Response) 
 
3 
                                         
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.h-1.k, and 1.m allege medical accounts referred to a different 
collection agency totaling about $4,476. Applicant provided documentation that she had 
consolidated all of these accounts under a repayment agreement. At the time she 
responded to the SOR, supporting documentation showed the total amount owed to the 
collection agency was $3,354.63. At the hearing, Applicant provided documentation 
showing that she made consistent monthly payments in 2018, and she had reduced the 
balance to less than $2,000. These debts are currently being paid. (Tr. 23-27; AE B, AE 
C, AE D; SOR Response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o alleges an unpaid utility account in the amount of $50. Applicant denied 
this allegation in her response to the SOR since she had paid this account in full. This 
account has been resolved. (Tr. 29; AE B; SOR Response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.p alleges an unpaid medical account referred to a collection agency in 
the amount of $50. Applicant denied this allegation in her response to the SOR since she 
had paid this account in full. This account has been resolved. (Tr. 28-29; AE B) 
 
Applicant established a monthly budget to keep track of her family’s monthly 
expenses. She and her husband have also watched their spending habits; for example, 
if they go out to eat, they do not eat at an expensive restaurant. They are current on their 
monthly expenses, and she is paying $200 monthly to one collection agency, and $100 
monthly to the other collection. Both she and her husband carry health insurance through 
their employers. They have not created any new debt, and they file their tax returns every 
year. (Tr. 32-33, 35; AE E)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor provided a character reference letter for Applicant. (AE A) 
He is aware of her financial troubles. He has known her for approximately two years, and 
he finds her work ethic and integrity to be impeccable. She is a reliable employee and he 
fully supports her receiving a security clearance. (Tr. 34-35) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
 
4 
                                         
 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
5 
                                         
 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
  The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,1 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s complications from her pregnancy, underemployment, and insufficient 
health insurance caused her to experience financial difficulties. These are circumstances 
beyond her control. It is important to note that she paid, is currently paying, or actively 
working towards resolution all of the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant made significant 
progress resolving her delinquent debts, and it is clear that she is committed to repaying 
all of her outstanding medical accounts. Her finances are under control, and future 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b) and 20(d) are established, 
and financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
    
                                            
1 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant’s actions show financial responsibility and good judgment, and she has 
established her reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See 
AG ¶ 18. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. 
I conclude that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:  For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
     Pamela C. Benson 
   Administrative Judge 
