1 
 
                                  
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS          
           
             
 
                            
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02305 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/07/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 
(AG). 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on November 7, 2018, and he requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 26, 2019, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on April 10, 2019. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was 
 
 
2 
 
identified as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered two exhibits (AE A-B), 
which were admitted without objection. The record remained open until May 10, 2019, 
to allow Applicant to submit documentary evidence. He submitted AE C through G, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 26, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, with explanations, and his admissions 
are incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
at his present job in November 2016. He served in the Air Force from 1982 until 1995 
when he was passed over for promotion to major. He separated with an honorable 
discharge. He joined the Air Force Reserve in 1998 and earned a retirement. In 2003, 
he deployed to Iraq, while a reservist, and was awarded a meritorious service medal for 
his actions. He begins receiving retired pay later this month when he turns 60 years old. 
He has a master’s degree. He was married in 1982 and divorced in 1994. He remarried 
in 1995 and divorced in 2016. He has eight children from both marriages. Two are 
minors for whom he pays child support.1  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant: filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in August 1996, 
which resulted in a discharge in November 1996; filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition 
in October 2002, which was dismissed in May 2003; and filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition in May 2003, which resulted in a discharge in November 2006. The SOR also 
alleged the following delinquent debts: a consumer collection debt of approximately 
$17,249; a collection account to a state for unpaid child support of approximately 
$1,054; a delinquent debt from a deficiency on a repossessed car of approximately 
$13,149; and two delinquent medical debts of approximately $1,599 and $105. The 
bankruptcies are supported by court filings and the debts were listed in credit reports 
from March 2017 and July 2018.2  
 
 Applicant credibly explained that he filed his 1996 Chapter 7 bankruptcy because 
of debts he incurred during his first marriage. His 2002 Chapter 13 bankruptcy was filed 
and soon dismissed for a procedural irregularity. It was refiled in May 2003 and the 
repayment plan was successfully completed leading to Applicant’s discharge of debts in 
November 2006. Applicant filed for bankruptcy in 2002-2003 because after “9-11” he 
went through a period of unemployment and underemployment leading to his financial 
difficulties. He has had no further bankruptcy filings.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 20-21, 23, 25; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 1-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-24; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 The status of his delinquent debts is as follows: 
 
 Child Support-$1,054 (SOR 1.f). Applicant credibly explained that he became 
delinquent on his child support when he was laid off from his job in February 2015 and 
could only secure a minimum wage job until he was hired by his current employer in 
November 2016. At one point his arrearages were approximately $10,000. He 
documented that automatic payments from his paycheck have paid the arrearages and 
that he is current on his monthly child support payments of approximately $366. This 
debt is being resolved.4 
 
 Consumer account-$17,249 (SOR 1.d). Applicant credibly explained that this 
was an SUV trailer that he and his wife purchased during his second marriage. At some 
point he was unable to make the payments and it was repossessed. He documented 
that any remaining obligation was assumed by his ex-wife and that she included this 
debt in her 2014 Chapter 13 bankruptcy. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 Repossession account-$13,149 (SOR 1.h). Applicant credibly disputed that this 
was a repossession account. He admitted that he got behind on his car payments and 
the bank intended to repossess this car, but his father secured a loan to pay the car 
loan and Applicant reimbursed his father. He documented the payment to pay the car 
loan. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 Medical accounts-$1,599; $105 (SOR 1.e and 1.g). Applicant incurred these 
medical bills when he was out of work. He talked to the providing facility and it indicated 
the bill would be taken care of. When he was made aware the debts were on his credit 
report, he disputed the debts. Those disputes are documented on his credit report. 
These debts are being resolved.7 
 
 Applicant provided a written budget, which shows that he has a monthly residual 
of approximately $200. He begins receiving his military retirement pay of approximately 
$3,300 monthly in June 2019, which will up his monthly residual amount. Although a 
past-due amount is reflected on his most recent credit report for a mortgage (not alleged 
in the SOR), that debt is the responsibility of his second ex-wife as indicated in their 
divorce settlement. He received financial counseling as part of his bankruptcy. 
Applicant’s 2018 job appraisal rated him an overall “4” indicative of his “high 
performance.”8  
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 25-26, 33, 35; Answer (attachment 9); AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-33; AE G (see Schedule F, p. 16 of 37). 
 
6 Tr. at 37-39; Answer; AE D. 
 
7 Tr. at 28-29; Answer; GE 8. 
 
8 Tr. at 29-30, 43; Answer (attachment 5); AE C, F. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
Applicant had debts discharged in 1996 and 2006 through bankruptcy. He also 
incurred debts that he was unable to pay and became delinquent. I find both the above 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s last bankruptcy was a Chapter 13 in 2006 and he successfully 
honored the terms of his payment plan to discharge any qualifying debts. He 
documented that he paid or was not responsible for the remaining debts, including the 
medical debts, which he disputed. He credibly testified that his most recent debts were 
due to his second divorce and periods of unemployment and underemployment. Once 
he became gainfully employed, he set about to honor his obligations by taking 
responsible actions. All the above mitigating conditions have some applicability. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, including his deployment to Iraq, his 
federal contractor service, his work appraisal, and the circumstances surrounding his 
indebtedness.  
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs: 1.a - 1.h:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
