 
1 
 
 
                                   
                    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
       
        
             
 
                           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 18-01879 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/04/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to public trust position is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 5, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). On 
July 19, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017.    
  
 On October 10, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, and she requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On February 28, 2019, the case was assigned 
 
2 
 
 
to me. On March 4, 2019, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of Hearing, setting the hearing for March 19, 2019.  
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3 into evidence, which I admitted without objection. Applicant testified, and 
offered eight documents, Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H into evidence, which I 
admitted without objection. At the request of Applicant, I held the record open for one 
month to submit additional documentation. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on April 1, 2019. On April 17, 2019, Applicant provided copies of six letters she mailed 
to her creditors. On May 20, 2019, Applicant provided an e-mail summary of the status 
of six SOR accounts, and her plans to start making payments to four of the creditors 
beginning June 1, 2019. She did not provide any substantiating documents with her e-
mail. The record was closed on May 23, 2019.   
 
      Procedural Matters 
  
 Department Counsel requested SOR ¶ 1.b be withdrawn since the alleged 
delinquent account was not Applicant’s account. She had only been listed as an 
authorized user on the account. I granted the request, and SOR ¶ 1.b was withdrawn for 
good cause. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact: Applicant is 38 years old. She is 
currently married and has four children, ages 4, 6, 7 and 17. The youngest two children 
receive Social Security disability of approximately $1,500 per month. Her spouse is 
attending college full-time using the benefits of his GI Bill, which pays for his tuition in 
full. He also receives a monthly stipend of about $750 from the GI Bill. He is not 
currently employed. Applicant is also enrolled in an on-line college class, which is partly 
paid by grants, and partly paid through student loans. She was unemployed from April 
2013 to August 2015. She was employed for a brief time from August 2015 to 
September 2015, and then the family moved to another state. She remained 
unemployed until December 2016, when she started employment with her current 
employer. She is a customer service employee for their call center. This is her first 
application for a public trust position. (Tr. 26-32, 36-38; AE 2) 
 
Applicant stated that she got into financial trouble due to her husband being 
unemployed, her periods of unemployment, and after she was involved in a car accident 
in May 2014. She often missed work due to constant headaches and pain. She 
exhausted all of her sick leave and vacation time. She was not covered by car 
insurance at the time of the accident, and she claimed the other driver was at fault. The 
other driver is suing her for damages, and Applicant’s lawyer is suing the other driver for 
her injuries and damages. This civil case is currently pending litigation. (Tr. 32-34) 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a delinquent car loan account in the amount of about $11,789. 
Applicant admitted this account in her response to the SOR. She said it was a joint 
account for her husband’s car, which they were unable to pay after he lost his job. This 
account became delinquent in 2017. The car is still in their possession, and this account 
remains delinquent. Applicant has not made payments on the account, or contacted the 
creditor, but she hired Lexington Law, a for-profit consumer financial repair company, in 
about November 2018 to contact this creditor and request a settlement offer. This debt 
has not been resolved. (Tr. 35-36, 47-48; GE 2)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.b was withdrawn. (Tr. 39) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a financial credit union account charged off in the amount of 
$1,500. Applicant admitted this account in her response to the SOR. She said this debt 
was the result of a job lost in 2013. At the hearing, she stated Lexington Law had this 
account removed from her credit report. She acknowledged that this was her debt, and 
she had not contacted the creditor or made any payments since she expected 
Lexington Law would communicate with the creditor about settling the debt. She was 
asked if she thought Lexington Law would contact the creditor after the account had 
been removed from her credit report. Applicant did not believe Lexington Law would 
take further action. Applicant planned to send out letters to her creditors in about four 
months. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 39-40) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges an apartment lease account referred for collection in the 
amount of $1,343. Applicant admitted this account in her response to the SOR. She 
said it was a result of her husband losing his job in 2011. This account became 
delinquent in 2012. At the hearing, Applicant claimed that she had not renewed her 
lease, and the apartment complex never provided her documentation with details why a 
balance was owed. She was not completely certain if this account had been removed 
from her credit report by Lexington Law. She acknowledged that she was preparing 
letters for multiple creditors to see if the debt could be settled or paid. She expected to 
prepare these letters, or make phone calls to creditors, within the next four months. This 
debt is unresolved. (Tr. 40-42, 45, 53-54; GE 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent cable bill in the amount of $1,151. Applicant 
denied this account in her response to the SOR, but at the hearing she admitted 
responsibility for this account. This account is no longer on her credit report, but she will 
prepare a letter to the creditor to see if the debt could be settled or paid. This debt is 
unresolved. (Tr. 42-43)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent cell phone account in the amount of $772. 
Applicant admitted this account in her response to the SOR, and listed that the debt is 
due to her losing her job at this cell phone company in 2013. At the hearing, Applicant 
admitted this debt remained delinquent. She planned to prepare a letter to this creditor 
to determine her payment options within the next four months. This debt is unresolved. 
(Tr. 43)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o allege unpaid medical accounts referred for 
collection in the total amount of $1,213. Applicant denied all of these medical accounts 
in her response to the SOR. At the hearing, she said she always carried medical 
insurance. With so many bills, she explained that she was not certain what medical 
services, or medical providers, did not obtain payment from her insurance. Some, if not 
all, of the medical accounts had been removed from her credit report with the help of 
Lexington Law. Applicant claimed that she had not received any bills or statements for 
any of these medical accounts. She planned to do research, and contact collection 
companies in an effort to determine the original creditor. Then, within the next four 
months, she would start sending out letters, or make phone calls, to these creditors to 
determine payment options. These debts are unresolved. (Tr. 43-45) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a delinquent account referred for collection in the amount of 
$8,534. Applicant denied this account in her response to the SOR, and listed that the 
debt was disputed and removed. This account became delinquent in 2013. At the 
hearing, she stated this debt is similar to the other apartment leasing complex debt. 
Applicant disputed this debt because she claimed they were no longer under a lease at 
the time they moved. This debt has been removed from her credit report. She had a 
letter at home showing that she was no longer responsible for this debt. Department 
Counsel requested documentation from Applicant to verify that this account was settled. 
Applicant stated she could provide the letter. Applicant failed to provide substantiating 
documentation while the record was held open. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 46-47, 53-
54) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j alleges a delinquent internet and TV utility account referred for 
collection in the amount of $857. Applicant admitted this account in her response to the 
SOR, and listed that the debt is due to her losing her job in 2013. At the hearing she 
stated this is a creditor she planned to contact within the next four months to determine 
her payment options. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 47) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k alleges a delinquent account referred by an insurance company in the 
amount of $455. Applicant denied this account in her response to the SOR. This 
account became delinquent in 2012. She listed this account was paid once she started 
insurance coverage with the company recently. Applicant failed to provide 
substantiating documentation. This debt is unresolved. (GE 3) 
  
Applicant nets approximately $4,410 per month, to include her income, the Social 
Security disability payment, her spouse’s GI Bill monthly stipend, and his Veterans 
Administration disability payment. She said the majority of their income goes to their 
utility bills. They are monitoring their utilities and they have also watched their 
entertainment expenses, by eating in more and not going to the movies as often. They 
have not been able to start a savings account. Lexington Law does offer financial 
counseling and advice on how to manage a budget. (Tr. 48-51, 54) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor submitted a character reference letter. He found Applicant 
to be a valuable part of the organization since she was hired in December 2016. She 
 
5 
 
 
takes her job seriously and does everything in her power to uphold the security 
standards. (AE A) 
Policies 
 
A memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense dated November 19, 2004, 
treats public trust positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable determination may 
be made. The standard set out in the adjudicative guidelines for assignment to sensitive 
duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.1 Once the 
Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden 
shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.2 An applicant 
has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never 
shifts to the Government.3 An applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Applicant’s 14 delinquent debts total approximately $29,000. These 
debts became delinquent between 2012 and 2017, and they remain delinquent. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 
19(a) (an inability to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). Further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending 
practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, 
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant bears the burdens of production and persuasion in mitigation. Her debts 
became delinquent between 2012 and 2017, and they remain delinquent. She has 
referenced financial hardships due to periods of unemployment for her and her spouse, 
and medical complications she received from a car accident in 2014; however, she has 
not provided sufficient information or documentation to establish the financial impact of 
these conditions beyond her control. More important, she must demonstrate that she 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not provided any 
documentary evidence of a debt-resolution plan she has established with her creditors, 
evidence of systematic payments in accordance with the plan, or even a receipt or letter 
showing she is no longer responsible for a specific account. She joined a consumer 
credit repair company in November 2018, after receipt of the SOR. This company will 
dispute all of a consumer’s reported debts, and perhaps have some of those delinquent 
accounts removed from the credit report, but this does not show any good-faith effort 
that an individual responsible for the account is working dutifully to resolve their 
delinquent debt. She recently sent an e-mail indicating that she will start making 
payments to four of her delinquent creditors next month. None of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions apply. 
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a trustworthiness determination by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s financial problems have persisted 
for several years, and there is no evidence that these problems are being addressed, 
being resolved, and are unlikely to recur. Even if Applicant experienced circumstances 
beyond her control that negatively impacted her finances, she must demonstrate that 
 
8 
 
 
she acted responsibly under the circumstances. After evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c-1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for public trust position is denied. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
