KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a
case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful
error.  Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge
denying Applicant a security clearance is affirmed. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-00324.a1
DATE: 06/04/2019
DATE: June 4, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
----------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-00324
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 13, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 18, 2019, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
 Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.   More
specifically, she has not challenged any of the Judge’s rulings, findings of fact, or conclusions.  Her
brief, however, does contain assertions that are not in the record, including that she recently filed
Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  The Appeal Board is prohibited from considering new evidence.  Directive
¶ E3.1.29.    
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
