1 
 
                               
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
                               
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-02152 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany White, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/06/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) by Applicant’s family connections to Pakistan. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 13, 2016. On 
November 28, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 2, 2019, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 6, 
 
2 
 
2019, and the case was assigned to me on April 4, 2019. On April 24, 2019, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for May 9, 2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. At Department Counsel’s 
request, supplemented by my own motion, I took judicial notice of relevant facts about 
Pakistan. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I; HX II; Tr. 8-9.) The facts noticed are set out below in 
my findings of fact. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX A), which 
was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 
and he admitted SOR ¶ 1.d in part. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old program manager employed by defense contractors 
since February 2009. He manages programs for two U.S. Government agencies. (Tr. 
23-24.) He worked for private-sector employers in the United States from August 2000 
to February 2009. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan. He came to the United States in August 1995 on 
a student visa and obtained a bachelor’s degree in business administration in August 
2000. He later learned a master’s degree in project management in May 2012. (AX A, 
Exhibit 6 at 3-9.)  
 
Applicant married in February 2003 and has two children, ages 14 and 9. His 
wife was born in Pakistan, came to the United States in 1998 or 1999, became a U.S. 
citizen, and sponsored Applicant for U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 21.) He became a U.S. citizen 
in October 2008. Their children are U.S. citizens. He renounced his Pakistani citizenship 
in April 2017. (AX A, Exhibit 1.) Applicant’s father-in-law is a citizen and resident of the 
United States, and his mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Canada. 
 
Applicant and his wife purchased a home in the United States in May 2003 and 
still live there. They do not own any property or have any financial assets in Pakistan. 
Applicant testified that if he and his two siblings inherit their parents’ home and 
investment properties in Pakistan, he would sell his share and bring the proceeds of the 
sale to the United States. (Tr. 29.) The record does not reflect the value of his parents’ 
home and investment properties. 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Pakistan. His mother is not 
employed outside the home. His father is employed by a company that was formerly 
Saudi-owned but has been privatized for the past four or five years. His father’s 
employer is an electrical power and construction company. (Tr. 27.) Both of his parents 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
have green cards issued in April 2015, allowing them to have extended visits in the 
United States and to eventually retire in the United States if they choose to. (AX A, 
Exhibit 5; Tr. 24-25.) Applicant testified that he previously visited his family members in 
Pakistan every two or three years, but he has not traveled to Pakistan for about five 
years. (Tr. 43.) Applicant’s mother has vision problems and has received treatment in 
the United States. If she requires additional treatment, Applicant anticipates that she 
and Applicant’s father will retire in the United States as permanent residents, and his 
mother will be able to obtain the treatment she needs. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant has two brothers, ages 46 and 44. Applicant’s younger brother is a 
citizen and resident of Canada. His older brother came to the United States in 1991, 
attended U.S. universities, and was then employed in the United States until 2002, 
when he returned to Pakistan. He runs a small weaving and printing business in 
Pakistan. He married in Pakistan and has two children, who are U.S. citizens by virtue 
of having been born in the United States. (Tr. 32.) Applicant talks to his older brother 
about once a week.  
 
 Applicant has two paternal uncles who retired from the Pakistani Army as 
brigadiers. One is 90 years old and retired about 35 years ago; the other is 80 years old 
and retired about 25 years ago. Their children reside in the United States and Canada. 
Applicant’s contact with his uncles is by telephone and infrequent. He last visited them 
in Pakistan in 2015. 
 
 Applicant has occasional contact with middle-school classmates from Pakistan. 
He regards one of them as a “good friend,” and they exchange text messages on social 
topics once or twice a month. (Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 Pakistan is a federal republic. It experienced election irregularities in May 2013, 
but elections have otherwise been free and fair. Transitions in the military and judiciary 
have been orderly. Although terrorist groups in Pakistan have been seriously degraded, 
they continue to operate from remote locations that historically have been exploited as 
safe havens. Pakistan suffered numerous terrorist attacks during 2016 and 2017. The 
United States suspended security assistance to Pakistan in August 2017, to encourage 
Pakistan to prevent militant and terrorist groups from using its territory. The Department 
of State discourages travel to Pakistan due to threats of terrorism. Pakistan’s most 
significant human-rights issues include extrajudicial and targeted killings, 
disappearances; torture, lack of rule of law, poor implementation and enforcement of 
laws, frequent mob violence, and vigilante justice with limited accountability. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
4 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), one of his brothers is a citizen and resident of Pakistan 
(SOR ¶ 1.c), and his two paternal uncles are citizens and residents of Pakistan and are 
both retired generals in the Pakistan military (SOR ¶ 1.d). The security concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual maybe manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. . . .  Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 Although the United States and Pakistan have had disagreements regarding the 
safe havens for terrorism, Pakistan is generally regarded in the United States as a 
friendly country. However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United 
States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. 
May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). Finally, we know friendly 
nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the 
economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to 
grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area 
where family members resided). 
 
6 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(f) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. The Applicant’s immediate 
family members in Pakistan and the risk of terrorism are sufficient to establish the 
“heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 AG ¶ 7(f) is not established. Although Applicant’s mother has vision problems, 
both of his parents are otherwise in good health. Applicant’s potential inheritance of 
property in Pakistan is speculative and uncertain, both as to the likelihood of it occurring 
and its value. His potential property interests in Pakistan were not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant, his wife, and his children are citizens and 
residents of the United States. He has lived in the United States since 1995, worked in 
the United States since August 2000, completed his education in the United States, 
 
7 
 
owned his residence in the United States since May 2003, and has been a U.S citizen 
since October 2008. Based on his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the United States, I am confident that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) is established for Applicant’s contacts with his paternal uncles. 
However, he has not overcome the rebuttable presumption that his contacts with 
immediate family members in Pakistan are not casual. See ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, 
sincere, and credible at the hearing. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign 
family members in Pakistan. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
