 
1 
 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00982 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 5, 2019 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct), F (financial considerations), and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 29, 2016, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On April 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines J, F, and E. The SOR detailed reasons why DOD 
CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
On May 5, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 19, 2018, was provided to him by letter that same 
day. Applicant received the FORM on October 19, 2018. He was afforded 30 days to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
submit any information within the 30-day period. On January 30, 2019, the case was 
assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old welder, who was unemployed at the time he completed 
his SF-86. He seeks a security clearance to secure employment with a Government 
contractor.  
 
Applicant was awarded an associate’s degree in 1991, and has earned various 
welding and construction-related certifications. Applicant married in 1991 and separated 
in 1999. The FORM does not provide any further information regarding the status of his 
marriage. Applicant has four adult children. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists 18 separate allegations under this concern. He admitted to 
all but two of the allegations.  
 
Summarized, those allegations are: (1) in 1986, arrested and charged with 
possession of narcotics; (2) in July 1993, arrested and charged with carrying a firearm 
without a license; (3) in February 1994, arrested and charged with carrying a firearm 
without a license; (4) in June 1994, arrested and charged with felony robbery, felony 
burglary, theft by unlawful taking, unlawful restraint, robbery, recklessly endangering, 
felony criminal conspiracy, and possessing an instrument of a crime (claimed these 
charges were dismissed); (5) in November 1994, arrested and charged with two felony 
counts of violating the state’s Controlled Substance, Drug, Device, and Cosmetic Act;  
 
(6) In May 1995, arrested and charged with two counts of possession of cocaine, 
four counts of felony possession with intent to manufacture or distribute, and felony 
criminal conspiracy; (7) in September 1996, arrested and charged with cruelty to a child 
and under the influence of a controlled substance; (8) In January 1997, arrested and 
charged with two counts of felony criminal mischief and two counts of felony criminal 
trespass; (9) in March 2001, arrested and charged with three felony counts of violating 
the state’s Controlled Substance, Drug, Device, and Cosmetic Act; (10) in April 2003, 
arrested and charged with two counts of manufacture or distribute possession with 
intent to manufacture or distribute, and possession of a controlled substance;  
 
(11) in May 2003, arrested and charged with two felony counts of violating the 
state’s Controlled Substance, Drug, Device, and Cosmetic Act; (12) in September 2003, 
arrested and charged with three felony counts of violating the state’s Controlled 
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Substance, Drug, Device, and Cosmetic Act, resisting arrest, and disorderly conduct; 
(13) in July 2004, arrested and charged with three counts of robbery (he denied this 
allegation); (14) in February 2011, arrested and charged with carrying a firearm without 
a license, receiving stolen property, disorderly and hazardous conduct, and carrying a 
loaded weapon; (15)  in February 2012, arrested and charged with two felony counts of 
violating the state’s Controlled Substance, Drug, Device, and Cosmetic Act, disorderly 
conduct, scattering rubbish, carrying a firearm without a license, receiving stolen 
property, disorderly and hazardous conduct, and carrying a loaded weapon;  
 
(16) in January 2013, arrested and charged with carrying a firearm without a 
license, possess-use-transfer of a firearm, resisting arrest, escape, possessing 
prohibited and offensive weapons, and carrying a loaded weapon; (17) in April 2014, 
arrested and charged with tampering or fabricating evidence, violating the state’s 
Controlled Substance, Drug, Device, and Cosmetic Act, and driving under the influence 
of alcohol or a controlled substance; and (18) currently on probation until September 
2021. 
 
These allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
submitted by the Government. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – l.r; Items 2 - 5) 
 
Applicant submitted no mitigating evidence in his SOR answer to suggest that he 
had overcome his 30-year history of criminal behavior from 1986 to 2014, other than a 
statement in his SOR answer, “I no longer live that destructive lifestyle.” (Item 2)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists five separate allegations under this concern. He admitted 
all of the allegations. 
 
Summarized, those allegations are: (1) owes the Federal Government 
approximately $23,000 for delinquent taxes for tax years 2011, 2012, and 2014; (2) has 
an unpaid $3,434 hospital medical collection account; (3) has an unpaid $555 medical 
collection account; (4) has an unpaid $542 medical collection account; and (5) has an 
unpaid $535 medical collection account.  
 
These debts are established by Applicant’s admissions and evidence submitted 
by the Government. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.e; Items 2 - 4, 6, 7) 
 
When queried about nonpayment of taxes during his Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview, Applicant explained he was going from job to 
job as a contract employee and lost his tax paperwork, and then forgot about filing his 
taxes. Applicant claimed that he contacted the IRS and started the process to file and 
pay his back taxes. The investigator discussed other accounts alleged during those 
interviews. (Item 4) Applicant submitted no mitigating evidence that addressed any of 
the allegations raised under this guideline. 
 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists seven separate allegations under this concern. He admitted 
all of the allegations. 
 
Summarized those allegations are: (1) the information alleged under criminal and 
personal conduct was cross-alleged under this concern; (2) used illegal drugs with 
varying frequency between 1988 until at least July 2015; (3) consumed alcohol at times 
to the point of intoxication with varying frequency from 1991 until at least April 2014; (4) 
more than one of the arrests alleged under criminal conduct involved excessive 
consumption of alcohol and/or use of illegal drugs; (5) fired in June 2011 for failure to 
follow safety rules; (6) fired in April 2014 for abusing sick leave for which some of the 
abuse was related to excessive drinking; and (7) fired or quit in lieu of being fired in July 
2015 for testing positive on a drug test. 
 
These allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
submitted by the Government. (SOR ¶¶ 3.a – 3.g; Items 2 - 5) Applicant submitted no 
mitigating evidence that addressed any of the allegations raised under this guideline. 
 
Department Counsel’s FORM discussed specific shortcomings of Applicant’s 
answer. He further emphasized long-standing DOHA case law that it is necessary for 
applicants to provide mitigating documentation. As noted, Applicant did not submit any 
additional information within the 30-day period following his receipt of the FORM. 
  
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
 
  
Criminal Conduct/Financial Considerations/Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 articulates the security concern for criminal conduct:  
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and  
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 Based on the evidence contained in the record under criminal conduct, AG ¶¶ 
31(a), 31(b), and 31(c) are applicable. Further review is necessary. 
Four potential criminal conduct mitigating conditions are listed under AG ¶ 32: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and   
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
  Based on the evidence contained in the record under financial considerations, 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) are applicable. Further review is necessary. 
AG ¶ 20 lists seven potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics that the individual may not properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information;   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information;  
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
Based on the evidence contained in the record under personal conduct, AG ¶¶ 
(c), (d) (1)-(4), and (f) are applicable. Further review is necessary. 
 
Seven potential personal conduct mitigating conditions are listed under AG ¶ 17:  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Inasmuch as Applicant submitted no mitigating evidence in response to the SOR 
or the FORM, none of the potential mitigating conditions were established under 
criminal conduct, financial considerations, or personal conduct. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the 
facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guidelines J, F, and E, I 
have reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in 
AG ¶ 2(d). Without other information suggesting his long-standing problems are being 
addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access to classified information. 
Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications. 
Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved against Applicant. 
 
Applicant has a criminal history spanning over thirty years for which he currently 
remains on probation. This history includes multiple arrests for drug-related offenses, 
multiple arrests for alcohol-related offenses and multiple arrests for illegal possession of 
a firearm as a convicted felon. Applicant’s history of convictions and his pattern of 
behavior continue to call into question his ability and willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. Although Applicant now claims that he has moved beyond the 
events from his past, the passage of time is insufficient to mitigate his extensive criminal 
history. Additionally, Applicant remains on probation, which reflects his state’s ongoing 
concern regarding his behavior and makes his recent good behavior less probative of 
rehabilitation.  
 
In addition to Applicant’s extensive criminal history, he has unresolved debts, 
most notably an estimated $23,000 he owes in back taxes for multiple tax years. He 
claimed that he filed his returns, but provided no information regarding when the filings 
occurred or the amount currently owed; nor did he provide any information regarding his 
non-tax debts. The Appeal Board has consistently held that a person who is unwilling to 
fulfill his tax obligations “does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of persons granted to classified information.” (ISCR Case No. 12-
09545 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 21, 2015); ISCR Case No. 14-02694 at 4 (Dec. 9, 2015); 
ISCR Case No. 14-02930 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015); ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct 9, 2015); ISCR Case No. 98-0810 at 4 (App. Bd. June. 8, 2000). 
 
Applicant has exhibited a long history of alcohol and drug abuse. His criminal 
past and substance abuse problems led to his terminations from various employers. 
Again, enough time has not elapsed and further evidence is required to demonstrate 
sobriety and responsible conduct. 
 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to 
submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, or mitigate the security concerns 
identified. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on a limited explanation 
lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, criminal conduct, financial 
considerations, and personal conduct security concerns remain. 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.r:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
