 
1 
 
                             
 
                                 
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
  
    
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01964 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/19/2019 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 20, 2017. On 
August 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 11, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before a DOHA Administrative Judge. Another Administrative Judge was assigned and 
scheduled a hearing for January 18, 2019. On January 14, 2019, Applicant notified the 
 
2 
 
Administrative Judge and Department Counsel that he no longer wanted a hearing, and 
requested a decision based on the written record. The Government’s written brief with 
supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted 
by Department Counsel on January 30, 2019. The case was assigned to me on May 29, 
2019. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM but did not submit a response. 
Government exhibits (GE) 1 to 6 are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old network administrator, employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2017. He was previously employed by another contractor from 
January 2016 to March 2016, and reported periods of unemployment, including from April 
2016 to March 2017. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1993 and a master’s degree in 
2005. He married in 1998 and divorced in 2003. He has one child. He does not currently 
hold a security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts: a child-support arrearage; a collection 
account; and two judgments totaling about $96,319. Applicant admitted SOR 1.a (child 
support) and 1.c (judgment), and denied SOR 1.b (collection) and 1.d (apartment 
judgment), with explanations. All of the SOR debts are supported by substantial evidence 
in the record. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant noted that his debts became delinquent as a 
result of an inconsistent work history. He stated that he is the victim of a combination of 
many years of a poor economy, living in a poor location for his skill set, being 
overqualified, and jobs in his career field being moved overseas. 
 
SOR 1.a involves Applicant’s child-support arrearage with interest charges, 
resulting in a past-due balance of $69,089. Applicant claimed to have a history of paying 
toward this debt when he is employed, and he communicates with the agency regularly. 
He did not provide documentary evidence supporting past payments or recent efforts to 
resolve the debt. The debt remains unresolved.  
 
SOR 1.b is a delinquent cell phone provider account. Applicant claimed that the 
debt was resolved and he could provide proof “upon request.” No such documentary 
evidence proof was provided. SOR 1.c is a loan obtained to start a mobile entertainment 
business in 2007. The business failed in 2008, and the debt was reduced to a judgment. 
It remains unpaid. SOR 1.d is a judgment from a debt from an apartment rental. Applicant 
provided evidence that the debt was paid in 2015. 
 
No evidence of credit counseling, current financial status, or other mitigating 
evidence was provided. 
 
3 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
4 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG 18: 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG 19 include: 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
5 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s unresolved debts have been a recurring problem that have not been 
sufficiently addressed. Although Applicant generally claims his irregular work history 
resulted in his inability to satisfy debts, he has not shown good-faith efforts to resolve 
three unpaid debts and a stable financial status. I have insufficient evidence of Applicant’s 
ability or willingness to satisfy his current financial obligations and pay the delinquent 
debts to which he is responsible, even though he has been employed since 2017. SOR 
1.d was satisfied. 
 
Applicant’s long-standing delinquent debts without a plan and good-faith efforts 
toward their resolution, raise significant doubts about his financial responsibility and he 
has not shown that continued financial problems are unlikely to recur. No mitigating 
condition fully applies to the remaining unresolved debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. AG 2(d). 
 
 Although adverse information concerning a single criterion may not be sufficient 
for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be found ineligible if 
 
6 
 
available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of questionable judgment, 
irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s 
delinquencies remain an ongoing concern. He has not shown evidence of whole-person 
factors sufficient to overcome the financial concerns. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security 
interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
