 
1 
 
                                                              
                    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
       
        
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01482 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
June 21, 2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
On September 28, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 11, 2019, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2019.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on March 19, 
2019, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 6, 2019. The Government 
offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered four exhibits at the hearing, referred to 
as Applicant’s Exhibits A through D.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record 
remained open until close of business on May 20, 2019 to allow the Applicant to submit 
additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted two Post-Hearing 
documents, which were admitted without objection as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 
A and B.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 23, 2019. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 55 years old.  He is unmarried with no children.  He has a high 
school diploma.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Harness Assembly 
Technician.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his Federal and State income tax 
returns as required for tax years 2002, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013 and 
2014.   He also failed to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2015 and 2016.  Applicant failed to pay his 2003 Federal income taxes and they were 
been written off by the IRS in 2015.  He owes approximately $23,579 in Federal back 
taxes and approximately $17,262 for four other delinquent debts.  In his answer, 
Applicant admitted allegations 1.a., through 1.k., and 1.o.  He was not aware of the 
debts set forth in allegations 1.l., 1.m., and 1.n.   
 
 Applicant began working for his current employer in 2006 and worked there until 
2009.  He was rehired in 2015 and he has worked there since then.  On August 23, 
2018, Applicant was offered a promotion if he is able to obtain a security clearance.  
Credit Reports of the Applicant dated August 10, 2017; and February 20, 2019, confirm 
each of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.) 
 
Applicant experienced several long periods of unemployment that has affected 
his ability to pay his debts.  He was unemployed from September 2008 to August 2009; 
December 2009 to October 2012; June 2013 to September 2014; and June 2015 to 
March 2016.  He states that due to a bad economy, he was unable to find a suitable job.  
During these periods, he collected unemployment benefits.  However, being off work for 
so long, he became depressed, overwhelmed and despondent.  The little money he did 
have he used to pay his rent and to survive.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.)  He 
states that he did not file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2002, 
2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014 because he did not have 
the money to file or pay his taxes.   
 
3 
 
 
Applicant also did not timely file his Federal or State income tax returns for tax 
years 2015 and 2016.  As a result of not filing his 2003 Federal income tax returns, his 
balance was written off by the IRS in 2015.  Applicant’s status report from the state tax 
authority dated December 5, 2018, indicates that as of that date, Applicant had filed his 
2011, 2015, 2016 and 2017 state income tax returns.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)   
 
Applicant currently owes Federal income taxes for tax years 2006, in the amount 
of $3,191; 2007, in the amount of $3,714; 2008, in the amount of $1,297.51; 2015, in 
the amount of $9,074.05; 2016, in the amount of $2,662.21; and 2017, in the amount of 
$3,639.84.  These taxes have not been paid and remain outstanding.  Applicant states 
that he plans to start a payment plan with the IRS to resolve this debt in June 2019.  
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.) 
 
Applicant initially testified that all Federal and state income tax returns have been 
filed and everything has been cleared up.  (Tr. p. 52.)  Applicant had no proof of filing 
with him, nor proof that he has paid his back Federal and/or state taxes.  Applicant 
stated that he started filing his taxes about three years ago, when he started working for 
his current employer.  The record was left open after the hearing to allow the Applicant 
to provide this documentation.   Applicant did not provide it.  Applicant also testified that 
if he receives his security clearance, the financial matters will be fixed immediately.  He 
will be promoted and assigned overseas, and the new job will allow him to be able to 
pay his delinquent taxes and other debts.  (Tr. pp. 60-62.)  Applicant stated that he is 
not currently on a payment plan with the IRS, but he plans to set up a payment plan and 
begin payments by next month.  (Tr. p. 62.) 
 
Applicant contends that in early 2018, his personal information was stolen and 
things have appeared on his credit report that he is not aware of, and that should not be 
there.  Applicant is disputing some of the delinquent debts listed on his creditor reports, 
and has placed a credit freeze and credit monitoring through the credit bureaus on his 
reports.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.) He initially thought that the following 
debts were not his: 
 
1.l.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $524.  Government Exhibit 4 indicates that the account was 
opened in 2016. Therefore, this debt had nothing to do with identity theft that took place 
in 2018.  Also, Government Exhibit 2 shows that Applicant discussed the debt at length 
with the interviewer.  Applicant now believes that it could be his debt.  Applicant recently 
located a copy of the “return receipt” showing that he returned the equipment to the 
creditor and that there is no balance owed.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.)  
Applicant states that he is making sure that the debt is being removed from his credit 
reports.   
 
1.m.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $1,119.  Government Exhibit 3 indicates that the account was 
opened in June 2013.  Therefore, this debt had nothing to do with identity theft that took 
place in 2018.  Applicant now believes the debt could be his debt.  (Tr. p. 68.)  In fact, 
 
4 
 
during his interview with the investigator, Applicant disputed the debt because he 
thought he had paid it, but he does not know for sure.  (Government Exhibit 2 and Tr. p. 
69.)  Since the debt does not appear on the Applicant’s most recent credit report, it will 
be assumed that the debt was paid.  (Tr. p. 70.) 
 
1.n.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the amount 
of $619.  Government Exhibit 4 shows that the account was opened December 2016.  
Therefore, this debt had nothing to do with identity theft that took place in 2018.  
Applicant also discussed the debt with the investigator and stated that he disputed the 
debt.  (Government Exhibit 2 and Tr. p. 71.)  Since the debt does not appear on 
Applicant’s most recent credit report, and Applicant states that he did not pay it, it is 
assumed to be successfully disputed.  (Tr. p. 72.)   
 
1.o.  A delinquent debt to a creditor in the approximate amount of $15,000 is 
being paid by the Applicant through garnishment.  Applicant pays $250 every pay period 
toward the debt.  Applicant states that he has now paid back $7,406 of the $7500 owed 
and when he pays it off in full, (when the garnishment is completed on June 1, 2019), he 
will begin a payment plan with the IRS.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.)    
 
 Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A is a notice of account dispute, indicating that a 
creditor has been removed from Applicant’s credit report.  The creditor is not one that is 
listed in the SOR.  Applicant has never received any financial counseling to improve his 
finances.  He is not adverse to the idea and believes it could be helpful. 
 
 Applicant admits to his financial mistakes of the past.  He indicates that he has 
solicited advice from his financial officer concerning his tax problems and was told to 
change his deductions on his W2 in order to avoid owing taxes at the end of the year.  
Applicant also increased his state tax each month by $50.  Applicant states that he is 
now taking ownership and responsibility for his finances and his life.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit B.)  
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth 
under this guideline.  Applicant completed an e-QIP dated August 8, 2017.  Section 26, 
Financial Record - Taxes asked, “In the last 7 years have you failed to file or pay 
Federal, state, or other taxes when required by law or ordinance?”  Applicant provided 
information on tax years 2013, 2015 and 2016.  He failed to provide any information 
about tax years 2010, 2012, and 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1.) 
 
In his interrogatory response dated August 22, 2018, Applicant was asked “have 
you ever failed to file your Federal income tax returns on time? . . . if yes, list which 
 
5 
 
years you failed to file your returns on time.”  Applicant failed to provide information that 
he failed to file his Federal income tax returns on time for tax years 2002, 2004, 2005, 
2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.  (Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
In that same interrogatory response, Applicant was asked “Have you ever failed 
to file your Federal income tax returns on time? . . . if yes, list which years are not 
currently filed.”  Applicant stated that, “all years have been filed.”  He did not list the fact 
that his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 
2010, 2012, 2013 and 2014 had not been filed.  (Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
In that same interrogatory response, Applicant was asked, “Have you ever failed 
to file your state income tax returns on time? . . . if yes, list which years you failed to file 
your state returns on time”.  Applicant did not provide information that he failed to file 
state income tax returns for tax years  2002, 2004, 2005, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, 2014, 
and 2016.   (Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
In that same interrogatory response, Applicant was asked, “Have you ever failed 
to file your state income tax returns on time? . . . if yes, list which years are not currently 
filed”.  Applicant failed to provide information that he had not filed his State income tax 
returns for tax years 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014. 
(Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
 Applicant explained that he is really bad with times and dates.  His memory is 
terrible.  And for the most part, he does not know why he answered the questions on his 
e-QIP and in response to the interrogatories the way he did.  He does not remember his 
mindset and at the time, he could have been thinking something completely different.  
He may have misunderstood the question or made a mistake.  (Tr. p. 89 – 96.) 
 
Performance appraisals of the Applicant for the years 2016, 2017, and 2018, 
reflect that he has consistently completed all of his goals, has a strong and positive 
work relationship with his team, and has mentored new employees.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
B.) 
 
Letters of recommendation from various coworkers of the Applicant attest to his 
hard working nature and tireless efforts to maintain the highest quality of products.  He 
is considered to be an exceptional employee, who is caring, empathetic, and supportive 
to others.  If he does make a mistake, he is forthcoming and honest about them and 
fixes the problem.  He is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   
 
An email correspondence from a government customer indicates that Applicant 
has been a valuable asset to the program’s efforts.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.) 
 
 Applicant received both a silver award on December 10, 2018, and a copper 
award on October 27, 2017, from his employer for going above and beyond, and for 
exemplary performance and team commitment in volunteering for overtime that kept the 
programs on track.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant has completed the requirements and received a Certificate, qualified as 
a Certified IPC Specialist in Soldered Electrical and Electronic Assemblies, and qualified 
as a Certified IPC Specialist in Acceptance for Cable and Wire Harness Assemblies.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
7 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income taxes for many years.  He 
continues to owe delinquent back taxes and he has other delinquent debts.  He remains 
excessively indebted.  Only one debt is being paid, and that is through garnishment 
from his payroll.  At this time there is insufficient information in the record to conclude 
that he is now financially stable, that he can afford his lifestyle, or that he has the 
financial resources available to handle his financial obligations.  No regular monthly 
payments are being made toward his debts, nor has he shown that he has done 
 
8 
 
anything about filing or paying his taxes.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  (g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.  
 
           There were obviously circumstances beyond the Applicant’s control that 
contributed to his financial difficulties.  Applicant was unemployed for extended periods 
and could not find work.  Although he was receiving unemployment benefits and at 
times working odd jobs, he was not earning enough money to pay his bills.  His taxes 
and other debts fell delinquent and have not been paid.  At this point, it cannot be said 
that he is financially stable or that he has made a good faith effort to resolve his 
indebtedness. 
  
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
9 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant deliberately falsified his e-QIP and his interrogatories in response to 
questions regarding his failure to file Federal and state income tax returns by failing to 
disclose them.  Applicant clearly knew this information, or should have found the 
information in order to accurately list them in response to the questions.  His lack of full 
disclosure shows poor judgment.  He did not exercise due diligence nor was he 
forthcoming in responding to the questions.  Instead, whether it was laziness or 
carelessness, he deliberately failed to list his failure to file taxes and pay taxes in 
response to questions on the e-QIP and in response to his interrogatories.  The 
Government relies on one’s responses to the questions on the e-QIP to determine ones 
trustworthiness.  If the answers are not truthful, the Government is misled, and 
Applicant cannot be trusted.  Under the circumstances, Applicant knew or should have 
known that he failed to file and deliberately did not list this information on his e-QIP and 
in his interrogatory responses.  There are no applicable conditions that could be 
mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:, through 1.l.     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m.:, and 1.n.   For Applicant   
  Subparagraph 1.o.:     Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.: through 1.e.   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
