1 
 
                                 
 
 
                            
                    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
    
     
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01062 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se  
06/13/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. As a result of a 2017 
psychological evaluation ordered by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF), a licensed clinical psychologist diagnosed Applicant with alcohol use disorder, 
stimulant use disorder, and delusional disorder in addition to identifying psychological 
characteristics that make Applicant a security risk. An independent evaluation procured 
by Applicant also resulted in a negative assessment of Applicant’s ongoing security 
worthiness. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2018, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the psychological conditions, personal conduct, alcohol 
consumption, and drug involvement and substance misuse guidelines.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on June 8, 2017.   
 
 
2 
 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to a 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke his security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on November 29, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, without objection. After the hearing, the 
Government submitted curriculum vitae (CV) for the psychologist who completed 
Applicant’s 2017 psychological evaluation. (GE 5.) The Applicant timely submitted AE L 
through O, which are also admitted without objection. (AE M.) DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 2018.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 51, has worked for his employer, a federal contracting company, since 
2008. He served in the Army from July 1985 to July 1989, and again from October 1990 
to July 1992. He received honorable discharges for both enlistments. Applicant has held 
a security clearance at various times since 1985. The SOR arises from an August 2013 
incident report that Applicant’s employer filed in the Joint Personnel Adjudication 
System (JPAS) raising concerns Applicant’s mental health. (Tr. 20-23, 30-33; GE 4.)  
 
The August 2013 Security Report 
 
Between September 2012 and May 2013, Applicant worked on what he 
described as a “special access program (SAP) in a high security location” in State 1. In 
late 2012, he reported possible elicitation attempts to his supervisor. Unsatisfied with 
how his former supervisor handled his concerns, Applicant filed a formal report 
regarding the attempted elicitation with his employer’s security department in August 
2013. (Tr. 20-23, 30-33; GE 4.) 
 
 According to a memorandum prepared by Applicant’s employer, dated August 
15, 2013, Applicant reported possible elicitation attempts he experienced while he was 
living and working in State 1. Although Applicant did not believe the facility in State 1 
was in danger, he believed that he was being targeted  by unidentified people. During 
the nine months he worked in State 1, he believed unidentified individuals were 
attempting to collect his personal information electronically and by burglarizing and 
bugging his home. He reported problems with his neighbors, including their inexplicable 
knowledge of details about his personal and professional life. He claimed that his 
neighbors repeatedly accused him of sex crimes and that he believed the police 
followed him. When he moved to State 2 in June 2013, he believed that his neighbors 
already knew his name and some information about him. Applicant also reported 
difficulty sleeping and people trying to “break him down.” (GE 4.) 
 
 Because of Applicant’s report, the security office filed an incident report in JPAS 
on August 21, 2013 indicating that Applicant was exhibiting paranoid behavior. The 
report noted that Applicant did not present a heightened risk of disruptive or violent 
behavior. On August 22, 2013, Applicant met with two members of human resources 
 
3 
 
and a security manager. The company representatives gave Applicant a mandatory 
referral to the Employee Assistance Program (EAP). In a memorandum memorializing 
that meeting, Applicant’s employer notes the conclusions from the EAP referral, which 
indicated that Applicant was not a risk to himself or others. The memorandum also 
noted that Applicant complied with the employer’s requirements and the referral was 
closed. Since August 2013, Applicant’s employer has not filed any other incident reports 
concerning Applicant exhibiting paranoid behavior or expressing paranoid beliefs at 
work. In 2017, Applicant received a monetary performance award and in 2018, his 
employer recognized him for ten years of service. (GE 3-4, AE D-E.)  
 
The 2017 Psychological Evaluation 
 
In December 2017, four years after the JPAS incident report, Applicant submitted 
to a psychological evaluation as requested by the DOD CAF. A licensed clinical 
psychologist contracted by DOD CAF performed the evaluation. In developing the 
conclusions presented in the 2017 evaluation report, the psychologist relied on a review 
of DOD Manual 5200.02, a clinical interview with Applicant, and the review of 
unspecified documents. Applicant also completed a personality assessment inventory 
(PAI). However, the psychologist was unable to interpret the results because Applicant 
answered the questions in a manner suggesting that he was trying to present himself in 
an uncharacteristically positive way. The LCP summarized her findings in the 2017 
evaluation report:  
 
[Applicant] has a history of stimulant abuse (cocaine, methamphetamine) 
and paranoid ideation that may be related to one another. This subject 
failed to disclose and sometimes denied documented problems with 
paranoia, mental health treatment, and substance abuse when asked 
directly about relevant questions. However, when confronted with this 
information, he acknowledged his history and gave elaborate explanations 
about both his problems and his failure to disclose them. It is not clear that 
[Applicant] continues to abuse stimulants or have floridly psychotic 
paranoid beliefs, but there is cause for concern in continuing beliefs that 
he is being monitored by the government and in his obtaining stimulants 
for the treatment of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
relatively late in life, after years of abuse of illegal stimulants. [Applicant’s] 
recurrent substance abuse, paranoid ideation, and engagement in 
deception are each psychological conditions that are sufficient on their 
own to impair his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, with their joint 
occurrence increasing the level of risk associated with granting [Applicant] 
a security clearance. (GE 5.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 The LCP diagnosed three psychological disorders as adversely affecting 
Applicant’s ongoing security worthiness: 
 
Diagnosis 1: History of Alcohol Use Disorder, severity and remission status 
unknown  
 
 
The LCP based this diagnosis on treatment between October 2004 and January 
2005 for substance and alcohol abuse. The report does not delve further into the issue 
and contains no information regarding Applicant’s alcohol consumption habits in the 
past or at the time of the evaluation.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he consumes alcohol occasionally and 
never to the point of intoxication. His only documented incident of alcohol-related 
misconduct is a 1999 charge for having an open container of alcohol in public. (GE 5.) 
 
Diagnosis 2: Stimulant Use Disorder, severity and remission status 
unknown 
The psychologist notes that in the clinical interview, Applicant described his 
history of drug abuse in general terms. He admitted using marijuana in high school, 
cocaine occasionally in the 1990s, and amphetamines on two occasions to help him 
stay awake during shift work. Citing an unspecified medical record, the psychologist 
determined that Applicant used cocaine and methamphetamine until 1997. The 
psychologist does not report the date Applicant began using illegal drugs or the 
frequency of use. In a June 2010 subject interview from a previous security clearance 
investigation, Applicant admitted that he began using methamphetamine daily in 2004, 
and that he voluntarily participated in an outpatient substance abuse treatment between 
October 2004 and January 2005. The psychologist also noted that in an unspecified 
security clearance application, Applicant described his methamphetamine use as 
experimental without indicating the frequency of use. The psychologist quotes an 
unidentified source indicating that Applicant had a relapse while being treated by a 
physician from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), but does specify when the 
relapse occurred. The psychologist also mentions that Applicant received a guarded 
prognosis regarding his future use of illegal drugs, but does not specify who offered the 
prognosis or when it was given. (GE 5.) 
 
The hearing record contains additional and conflicting statements from Applicant 
regarding his history of substance abuse. In an October 2013 security clearance 
application, Applicant reported that he received substance abuse treatment, but 
reported that he only experimented with methamphetamines on two occasions. It is 
unclear if the psychologist reviewed the October 2013 security clearance application. At 
hearing, Applicant testified that he took a leave of absence from work to address his 
substance abuse issues. He described his use of illegal drugs as not being serious 
enough to warrant inpatient treatment.  Applicant further testified that he did not have a 
security clearance at the time he used illegal drugs and sought treatment. Since 
completing treatment in 2005, he denies use of any illegal substance. (GE 5.)  
 
5 
 
In the evaluation, the psychologist discussed Applicant’s diagnosis for ADHD, 
expressing concern that Applicant received an ADHD diagnosis in his forties given that 
the disorder usually has childhood onset and is usually diagnosed and treated before 
midlife. However, the psychologist did not perform testing to confirm or refute the 
diagnosis. The psychologist’s doubt about the appropriateness of the ADHD diagnosis 
given Applicant’s history of methamphetamine abuse weighs heavily in her overall 
assessment of Applicant’s mental health and ongoing security worthiness. (GE 5.)  
 
The psychologist opined that the paranoid ideation that Applicant experienced 
resulted in the August 2013 security report could be an indication of amphetamine 
abuse, citing the low probability of an individual experiencing paranoid ideation when 
taking amphetamines prescribed at therapeutic levels. However, the 2017 evaluation 
does not discuss Applicant’s ADHD treatment history or medication dosages, nor does 
the evaluation note that the psychologist reviewed any medical records relevant to the 
issue. (GE 5.) 
 
According to the hearing record, Applicant was diagnosed with ADHD in late 
2011 or early 2012. Medical records produced by the Government indicate that 
Applicant’s physician confirmed the diagnosis in March 2014 after conducting a formal 
battery of tests. Applicant began taking prescribed amphetamines in March 2012. His 
physician monitored and adjusted the dosage of amphetamines as needed. When 
Applicant moved to State 1 in September 2012, he engaged a psychiatrist to monitor his 
medication. Between October 2012 and June 2013, that psychiatrist prescribed an 
amphetamine medication at a dosage of 30 milligrams (mg) above the drug 
manufacturer’s recommended daily maximum dosage. According to the manufacturer, 
paranoid ideation is a side effect of the particular amphetamine prescribed. This nine-
month period precedes Applicant’s August 2013 security report. When Applicant moved 
to State 2 in July 2013, he resumed treatment with the psychiatrist who treated him in 
the months before his move to State 1. Over the next six months, the psychiatrist 
reduced the amphetamine dosage to a level 30mg below the manufacturer’s 
recommend daily maximum dosage. Since the August 2013 security report, Applicant’s 
employer has made no other reports of paranoid ideation or behaviors. (Tr. 49; GE 7; 
AE I.)  
 
The hearing record also includes treatment notes from March 2014 to June 2015. 
During that 18-month period, Applicant had six routine visits with his primary care 
physician. During each visit, the doctor assessed Applicant’s mental state and mood as 
appropriate. The records do not contain any concerns about paranoid ideation or any 
other concerns about Applicant’s mental health. The records also do not raise any 
concerns about Applicant misusing his ADHD medication or engaging in drug-seeking 
behavior. In November 2014, Applicant began taking Adderall as prescribed without any 
noted impact on his mood. Applicant also provided treatment notes from a July 2018 
doctor visit. He informed the doctor about the concerns raised in the 2017 evaluation 
about his use of stimulant medication. In response, the doctor indicated that he would 
review Applicant’s formal testing and make any changes deemed necessary. Applicant 
denies any use of illegal substances since he completed the substance abuse treatment 
program in 2005. He also denies taking his ADHD medication in a manner other than 
 
6 
 
prescribed. The record does not contain any instances work place or criminal 
misconduct related to substance abuse. (GE 7; AE G.)  
 
Diagnosis 3: Delusional Disorder, persecutory type, severity and remission 
status unknown 
 
 During the evaluation, Applicant denied ever having being treated for any other 
mental health problem aside from ADHD. He denied experiencing any past paranoid 
ideation. Applicant also denied the mandatory EAP referral issued by his employer was 
in response to his August 2013 security report. The psychologist noted that when 
Applicant was confronted about his August 2013 security report and statements he 
made to his physician about the ADHD medication making him feel paranoid, Applicant 
continued to offer either explanations that were contrary to the evidence or explanations 
that minimized the seriousness of the reported issues. (GE 5.) 
 
 Based on the available information, the psychologist determined there was not 
enough information to support a delusional disorder diagnosis. However, the 
psychologist expressed concerns that Applicant’s paranoid ideation was not completely 
resolved based on the paranoid behavior he exhibited during the evaluation. The 
behaviors what the psychologist classified as “not unreasonable, but uncommon” 
included, asking the psychologist to produce identification after being asked to produce 
his own, and expressing relief when informed that the PAI would be completed on an 
encrypted virtual private network (VPN). The psychologist also citied, as evidence of 
Applicant’s ongoing paranoid ideation, his statements about government agencies 
monitoring digital communications and his belief that his status as an employee of a 
federal contracting company increased the likelihood that he was being monitored. The 
monitoring, the psychologist noted, did not bother Applicant who explained that he 
viewed the government employees who monitor others for security risks as “just doing 
their jobs.” Applicant explained to the psychologist that he worked on the development 
of such a monitoring program. (GE 5.) 
 
 Additional Psychological Concerns  
 
In addition to the three diagnoses described above, the psychologist also cited 
the following as “psychological characteristics interfering with Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness:” 
 
[Applicant] was not honest and forthcoming about his substance use 
history or mental health history with this examiner. Again, although 
[Applicant’s] deceptiveness and guardedness make it difficult to assess 
the current severity of his symptoms and whether they occur 
independently of or only as a result of stimulant abuse, his deceptiveness 
in itself is a psychological characteristic that clearly intervenes with his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
The psychologist rated Applicant’s prognosis as poor. (GE 5.) 
 
 
7 
 
 2018 Psychological Evaluation  
 
 Applicant procured a second psychological evaluation after the hearing. The 
evaluation was completed by a three-person evaluation team, including a board certified 
psychologist, a post-doctoral resident in clinical psychology, and a clinical psychology 
intern. The evaluation process included a personality assessment inventory, a clinical 
interview involving all the members of the evaluation team, and a review of the 2017 
evaluation report. The evaluation team considered the purpose of the evaluation to 
provide an “unbiased, third-party assessment in order to provide a second opinion on 
this matter.” (AE M.) 
 
While the PAI scores produced a valid clinical profile, the evaluation team did not 
interpret the results. Despite being warned against doing so, the evaluation team 
determined that Applicant’s approach to the PAI showed an attempted “manipulation of 
test items.” As a result, the evaluation team concluded that Applicant was “likely evasive 
and unwilling to admit to many personal faults.” The evaluation team observed that, 
“[i]ndividuals with similar profiles are often uninterested and unwilling to discuss their 
problems.” During the evaluation, Applicant provided statements and explanations 
inconsistent with those he provided during the 2017 evaluation on several topics, 
including: his history of mental health treatment, his history of illegal drug use, and the 
purpose of the 2013 EAP evaluation. Given the limited record review and the evaluation 
team’s finding that Applicant was an unreliable historian, the evaluation team did not 
believe they had enough information to make any formal or specific diagnoses. 
However, they reached the following conclusion: 
 
This evaluation seems to be consistent with [the 2017 evaluation]. 
[Applicant] is consistently evasive and deceptive in his interview 
responses as well as personality test results.  
 
Unless he is confronted with evidence, [Applicant] appears to deny or 
minimize any issues that may warrant serious attention. This is a 
significant integrity, reliability, and trustworthiness deficit … 
 
It is unknown at this time, due to a lack of credible information if 
[Applicant] is suffering from any mental disorders, however it is 
recommended that he seek counseling for his current stressors. 
 
From a psychological perspective and as a result of extensive 
psychological testing and  evaluation, it is felt that he is not recommended 
for a position impacting national security or involving public trust at this 
time. He should be reevaluated. (AE M.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
2019 Comprehensive Assessment 
 
 
In January 2019, Applicant submitted to a “compressive assessment” performed 
by a licensed clinical professional counselor (LCPC). The letter provided by the LCPC 
states, in its entirety: 
 
I met with and conducted a Comprehensive Assessment of [Applicant] 
on 15 January 2019. [Applicant] was open and forthcoming with all of the 
information that I asked of him. In my opinion, he is trustworthy and 
competent to hold a U.S. Government Security Clearance. (AE O.) 
 
The note does not indicate what type of evaluation protocol was used or the sources of 
information used to reach the stated conclusion. In his post-hearing submission, 
Applicant indicated that he intended to continue “ongoing therapeutic counseling and 
medication management from a duly qualified mental health professional for my adult 
ADHD symptoms.” (AE L.) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant appeared appropriately dressed and his mood and 
disposition were appropriate for the setting. Applicant admitted that he is very security 
conscious. He stays current on all of his security training and routinely reads the 
security pamphlets published by his employer. He is mindful of his surroundings and is 
careful not to discuss his work in public to avoid unwittingly compromising his 
employer’s or the government’s interests. (Tr. 28-29.)  
 
Policies 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
9 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 Applicant’s August 2013 security report raised concerns about his mental health 
and resulted in the DOD CAF requesting a psychological evaluation to determine 
Applicant’s continued ability to properly handle and safeguard classified information. 
The evaluation, completed by a licensed clinical psychologist in December 2017, raised 
a number of concerns that negatively affect Applicant’s ongoing security worthiness.  
 
 Based on the results of the December 2017 evaluation, the SOR alleges 
disqualifying conduct under the psychological conditions, drug involvement and 
substance misuse, alcohol consumption, and personal conduct guidelines. The 
psychologist diagnosed three disorders: alcohol use disorder, stimulant abuse disorder, 
and delusional disorder. The psychologist qualified each diagnosis as “severity and 
remission status unknown.” In addition, the psychologist identified behaviors Applicant 
exhibited during the evaluation that may suggest a problem with paranoid behavior. 
However, the most significant finding relating to Applicant’s ongoing security worthiness 
is the psychologist’s negative credibility assessment. The psychologist concluded that 
Applicant was an unreliable and incredible source of information. Applicant’s 
inconsistent and contradictory disclosures and his attempts to present himself in an 
uncharacteristically favorable light prevented the psychologist from making a more 
definitive assessment. 
 
 However, it is worth noting that the 2017 evaluation is not without its flaws. The 
report does not identify the records reviewed in reaching the conclusions presented. 
The report alludes to, but does not detail, a more extensive history of mental health 
issues as well as a more extensive history of substance abuse than reported by 
 
10 
 
Applicant or contained in the hearing record.  Accordingly, it is unclear how many times, 
and under what circumstances Applicant received mental health or substance abuse 
treatment in the past.  
 
 The 2017 evaluation is also problematic in the way it treats Applicant’s adult 
ADHD diagnosis and treatment. The psychologist expressed doubt about the diagnosis 
without performing testing to confirm or refute it. Because of her doubts about the 
appropriateness of the diagnosis and her negative assumptions as to why Applicant 
sought treatment, she did not consider the connection between Applicant’s past history 
of substance abuse and his untreated ADHD symptoms. The psychologist did not 
examine or discuss the relationship of these factors in reaching her conclusion about 
Applicant’s prognosis for future substance abuse.  
 
 Although the psychologist raised legitimate concerns about the potential dangers 
of amphetamine abuse given Applicant’s history and the possible impact of long time 
amphetamine use on Applicant’s mental health, these concerns are rooted in the 
assumption that Applicant is abusing his legally prescribed amphetamine medication. 
They psychologist does not cite any contemporaneous event on which to base this 
assumption, only that she does not believe Applicant’s statements that he takes his 
ADHD medication as prescribed.  The psychologist also dismisses the possibility that 
the paranoid ideation Applicant experienced resulting in the August 2013 security 
report, was temporary and caused by possible overmedication by his treating 
psychiatrist. It is unclear if the psychologist reviewed any medical records from 
Applicant’s treating psychiatrist or if the psychologist reviewed relevant documents and 
decided to given them little to no weight. The record does not contain any information to 
support concerns about amphetamine abuse. The available medical records do not 
contain any evidence to indicate Applicant has engaged in drug-seeking behavior or 
that Applicant is engaged in prescription drug abuse. Nor do any of the medical records 
indicate problems with ongoing paranoid ideation or behavior. 
 
 Because the psychologist did not view Applicant in a favorable light, she 
considered his overall behavior and demeanor problematic. The psychologist elevated 
behaviors she described as “unusual, but not unreasonable,” as being evidence of 
potentially unresolved paranoid behavior. Because of Applicant’s lack of credibility, the 
psychologist determined that the only way to justify Applicant’s behavior was to “choose 
between a susceptibility to paranoid delusions, paranoia induced by amphetamine or 
methamphetamine abuse, or both. The psychologist did not consider any benign 
motivations for Applicant’s behavior and statements.  
 
 Of particular concern to the psychologist were Applicant’s statements about 
government monitoring of his electronic communications.  In evaluating the significance 
of these statements, context is key. In the psychological evaluation, Applicant exhibited 
an indifferent attitude toward the occasional and passive government monitoring of his 
digital communications2 as opposed to the active, targeted, and malicious intentions of 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s statements regarding government monitoring of electronic communications are not incorrect.  
Government information systems are routinely monitored, and warnings about such monitoring are 
displayed each time a user logs on to government information system. Also, government monitoring of 
11 
 
unknown actors he reported in the August 2013 report. Aside from noting the behaviors, 
the psychologist does not indicate that Applicant’s concerns caused him to refuse to 
participate or cooperate in the evaluation protocol. Applicant is extraordinarily security 
conscious. He is hyper-vigilant about his environment and security practices. His 
behavior and statements during the interview are in line with these personality traits. 
The security concerns raised by these behaviors are resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
  Despite the flaws in the evaluation report, the psychologist identified a security 
concern not previously raised in prior adjudications of Applicant’s security clearance. 
The psychologist determined that Applicant possessed psychological characteristics 
that may impair his judgment, stability, reliability, or trustworthiness.  Specifically, his 
deceptiveness and failure to provide full, frank, and candid disclosures regarding 
adverse information until confronted with evidence. The psychologist rated Applicant’s 
prognosis as poor. The observations regarding Applicant’s lack of credibility, 
evasiveness, deceptiveness and the adverse effect on Applicant’s continued security 
worthiness, were corroborated by the team of duly-qualified mental health professionals 
Applicant retained in December 2018 for an independent psychological evaluation.  
  
 The record supports a finding that following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
 Psychological Conditions Disqualifying Condition 28(b): an 
opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition that may impair judgment, stability, 
reliability, or trustworthiness;  
  
 Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition 16(b): deliberately 
providing false or misleading information; or concealing or omitting 
information, concerning relevant facts to an …mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to 
national security eligibility determination…; 
 Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Condition 22(d): 
 
diagnosis 
by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional of alcohol 
use disorder; and  
 
 Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse Disqualifying 
Condition 25(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental 
health professional of substance use disorder. 
 
While the record does not contain any recent adverse reports from law enforcement or 
his employer indicating that Applicant has current problems with substance abuse, or 
delusional or paranoid behaviors, there is insufficient evidence in the record to mitigate 
the security concerns raised by the 2017 and 2018 evaluation reports.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
the electronic communications of private citizens has long been the subject of law suit filed by civil rights 
organizations. See, e.g., https://www.aclu.org/issues/national-security/privacy-and-surveillance. 
 
 
12 
 
 The Applicant offers two potential sources of mitigation: his statements regarding 
his current alcohol consumption habits, his compliance with his ADHD treatment plan, 
and his assessment of his overall mental health; and, the January 2019 comprehensive 
assessment from a LCPC. Because Applicant has provided inconsistent statements 
about his substance abuse history and mental health treatment history, as well as his 
propensity to present himself in an uncharacteristically favorable manner, his testimony 
carries little weight. Applicant’s statements that he will receive ongoing therapeutic 
counseling from an LCPC also fail to mitigate the alleged security concerns. Applicant 
did not present any information regarding the nature and scope of the therapeutic 
counseling, nor has Applicant demonstrated that he acknowledges or understands the 
concerns raised in the 2017 and 2018 evaluations. The January 2019 compressive 
assessment, indicating that Applicant is trustworthy and competent to hold a security 
clearance, is also insufficient evidence of mitigation. The assessment does not provide 
any basis for this conclusion or any explanation to refute the conclusions in the 2017 
and 2018 evaluations. Nor does it provide a favorable prognosis for any of the identified 
issues. According none of the mitigating conditions available under the alleged 
guidelines apply.  
 
Whole Person Assessment 
 
 Applicant is a long-time clearance holder. He takes his responsibilities to adhere 
to security produces and regulations very seriously. He is always cognizant of and 
vigilant in his surroundings. Despite this favorable information, doubts remain about his 
ongoing security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is 
to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.” (AG ¶ 2(d).) The 2017 and 
2018 psychological evaluations independently reached conclusions supporting a 
negative-whole person assessment. Applicant’s inability to acknowledge or deal with his 
problems raises concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness that make 
his continued access to classified information an unacceptable security risk. As the 
August 2013 security report shows, Applicant will report any perceived security threat in 
his external environment. However, the evaluations raises concerns that he will not 
acknowledge, admit, or report potential security issues raised by his own behavior 
preventing the government from fully assessing Applicant’s security worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Psychological Conditions   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c, 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  
 Subparagraph 1.d:      For Applicant 
  
 
13 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings (Continued) 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct  AGAINST APPPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:       Against Applicant 
Paragraph 3, Alcohol Consumption   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 3.a:      Against Applicant 
Paragraph 4, Drug Involvement and  
Substance Misuse    
 
 
  AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 4.a:  
 
    Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
