 
                               
 
  
1 
 
                             
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-01128 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
06/07/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 23, 2017. On 
August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines G and J. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (December 10, 2016). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 19, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Applicant’s answer to the SOR included 16 pages 
 
2 
 
captioned as “self-reflection,” containing his introspective personal evaluation of the 
impact of alcohol consumption on his life, followed by favorable comments from several 
friends and former colleagues who read it.  
 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 7, 2019, and the case was 
assigned to me on April 4, 2019. On May 3, 2019, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for May 23, 2019. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of five 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through M, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g. 
He did not specifically admit or deny the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, which cross-alleges the 
conduct in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.f. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old cybersecurity analyst employed by a defense contractor. 
He was a part-time bartender from August 2006 to May 2015, and he also worked part-
time in construction and home-cleaning services from June 2006 to January 2013. He 
received an associate’s degree in May 2015. Shortly thereafter, he began working for a 
defense contractor as a help-desk technician. In October 2017, he began working in his 
current position. He has held a security clearance since December 2015. 
 
 Applicant has never married and has no children. He has lived with a cohabitant 
and her three children since June 2017. (Tr. 95-96.)  
 
 In January 2013, Applicant was stopped by a state trooper for speeding (60 miles 
per hour in a 45-mile-per-hour zone). Applicant had consumed three or four beers. He 
testified that a regular beer for him was a 22-ounce draft beer. (Tr. 98.) He failed a field 
sobriety test and a breathalyzer registered a blood-alcohol content (BAC) of 0.12. (Tr. 
100.) He was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). On advice of his 
attorney, he attended an alcohol-education class before his court appearance. He could 
not remember receiving any diagnosis after the class, but he remembered that he was 
advised to modify his consumption. He followed that advice to the extent that he stopped 
drinking hard liquor and limited himself to beer. (Tr. 101-02.) He pleaded guilty and was 
sentenced to probation before judgment, confinement for 20 days (suspended), and a 
$185 fine. He was placed on probation for three years, until June 2016. (GX 3 at 1-2.) 
 
 In October 2015, Applicant was stopped by a state trooper for crossing the white 
line on the edge of the road. He had consumed four or five beers. He was detained for 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
about an hour until he was released to his brother’s custody. He remembered that a 
breathalyzer at the police station registered a BAC of 0.20. (Tr. 106.) The charges were 
dismissed pursuant to a plea agreement requiring him to make a $5,000 charitable 
contribution, undergo a 28-day treatment program, and install an ignition interlock on his 
vehicle. (GX 2 at 8; Tr. 107.) His treatment consisted of 54 group sessions and 4 individual 
sessions. He was diagnosed with a severe alcohol-use disorder. He completed the 
program in November 2015. The treatment facility recommended that he abstain from 
alcohol, complete an intensive outpatient addiction-counseling program, attend 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or equivalent meetings a minimum of three times a week, 
and obtain a male AA sponsor. Applicant abstained from alcohol for about two or three 
months, but he did not follow any of the other recommendations. (Tr. 110.) 
 
 In June 2018, Applicant was stopped by city police for driving without his headlights 
turned on. He had spent the day on a beach vacation with his cohabitant and her sisters, 
and had consumed several beers throughout the day. He was arrested for DUI. (GX 3 at 
3-4.) His interim clearance was revoked on September 4, 2018. (SOR Answer at 16.) His 
trial was pending when the SOR was issued. In December 2018, he entered an “Alford 
plea,” which does not admit guilt but admits that the prosecutor has sufficient evidence to 
prove guilt. (Tr. 113.) He was fined $600 and sentenced to 11 days in jail. He served four 
days and received a work release. He is required to have an ignition interlock on his 
vehicle until July 3, 2019. (AX M at 2; Tr. 116-17.) 
 
 Applicant testified that after his arrest in June 2018, he went home, consumed half 
a beer, and decided to stop drinking. He testified that he has not consumed alcohol since 
June 22, 2018. (Tr. 115.) 
 
 In July 2018, Applicant entered a 12-week substance-abuse treatment program 
that included weekly breathalyzer tests and random urinalysis screening. As of 
September 24, 2018, his prognosis was “good.” (AX E.) He completed the program in 
October 2018. (Tr. 124.) 
 
 Applicant began attending AA meetings on the day he was released from jail in 
June 2018. He attended meetings daily for 60 days. He then began attending meetings 
three times a week and calling his sponsor daily. He did not attend meetings or talk to his 
sponsor for about six weeks in February-March 2019, but he has resumed meetings and 
talks to his sponsor about once a week. (Tr. 118-22.) His sponsor submitted a letter 
expressing confidence in his continued sobriety and recovery. (AX F.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother and stepfather submitted a joint statement, and his mother 
testified at the hearing. She testified that for many years they had little contact with 
Applicant, even though they are a large and socially active family and underwent several 
health emergencies. They witnessed his drinking binges and his hangovers. Since June 
2018, Applicant has attended all family functions, he calls his mother daily, and his attitude 
and temperament has changed. He no longer is involved in the bar and restaurant 
business and no longer indulges in the heavy drinking after work that was common when 
he was working as a bartender. (Tr. 24-32; AX B.) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s cohabitant submitted a statement and testified. She and Applicant have 
known each other for about 13 years and both worked at the same bar and restaurant. 
They became friends and now live together. She has a security clearance and is the 
assistant facility security officer for a defense contractor. She testified that Applicant is a 
kind and generous person and a talented and dedicated employee. She has watched him 
attend AA meetings and listened to him talking to his sponsor. She believes he has a 
strong support system, including herself, his mother, stepfather, brother, colleagues, 
many friends, and his AA sponsor. She was present when Applicant returned from work 
after his most recent arrest and said, “I can’t do this anymore. This is going to destroy my 
life.” She testified that she has observed Applicant at events where alcohol was being 
served, and he has seemed comfortable limiting himself to non-alcoholic drinks. She 
believes that he has been abstinent since June 22, 2018. (AX D; Tr. 34-46.) 
 
 Applicant’s aunt, a recently retired federal employee with 33 years of service, 
regards herself as his “favorite aunt.” She testified that Applicant comes from a large, 
strong family that supports his decision to overcome his alcohol problems. She testified 
that the family gathers almost every month for a special occasion, and alcohol is served 
at these gatherings. Applicant has attended every gathering, and he has not consumed 
alcohol at any of them. (Tr. 58-66.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor when the June 2018 incident occurred testified that he was 
notified when Applicant was arrested. His former supervisor changed jobs in August 2018, 
moving from being the contractor lead to being the government lead. He was impressed 
by Applicant when he was the contractor lead and continued to be impressed when he 
became the government lead. He and Applicant have become personal friends. They 
recently traveled to a job location, and most of the contractor employees and government 
employees went out for the evening after work, but Applicant asked to be dropped off for 
an AA meeting in the area. (Tr. 78-85.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor since August 2018 testified and submitted a statement. She 
testified that she and Applicant work together daily, and she has had the opportunity to 
know him on a personal level. She testified that Applicant has been very open about his 
problem with alcohol and his steps to overcome it. Applicant is under consideration for 
promotion based on his technical skill, leadership, and overall performance. She admires 
him for his decision to seek help, complete treatment, and commit to sobriety. She 
believes Applicant is qualified for a security clearance. (AX A; Tr. 68-77.) 
 
 Three family members (his father, an uncle, and a cousin) submitted letters 
attesting to Applicant’s good character and dedication to overcoming his alcohol 
problems, and one of them suggested that alcohol abuse was a family problem. (AX I, J, 
and K.) A former co-worker and a current co-worker regard him as hardworking, focused, 
and passionate about his job. (AX G and H.)  
 
  
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
6 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested for DUI in January 2013 and was 
convicted (SOR ¶ 1.a); received treatment for alcohol abuse in February 2013 (SOR ¶ 
1.b); was arrested for DUI in September 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and received treatment in 
October 2015 for a diagnosis of a severe alcohol-use disorder (SOR ¶ 1.d). It also alleges 
that he continued to use alcohol from November 2015 to June 2018, contrary to treatment 
recommendations (SOR ¶ 1.e); was arrested for DUI in June 2018 (SOR ¶ 1.f); and was 
enrolled in a 12-week treatment program beginning in July 2018 (SOR ¶ 1.g).  
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control 
impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” 
The relevant disqualifying conditions are: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed 
clinical social worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(e): the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(f): alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are established by Applicant’s arrests for DUI in January 
2013, September 2015, and June 2018. AG ¶¶ 22(d), 22(e), and 22(f) are established by 
 
7 
 
his treatment in October 2015, a diagnosis of severe alcohol-use disorder in November 
2015, and his continued alcohol consumption, contrary to a treatment recommendation 
that he abstain from alcohol. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed a treatment program 
along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance 
with treatment recommendations. 
 
 AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. Applicant’s excessive alcohol consumption was 
recent, frequent, and did not occur under unusual circumstances making recurrence 
unlikely. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of all the evidence. If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then 
an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
Applicant’s deeply personal and introspective analysis of his conduct in his answer 
to the SOR, his testimony at the hearing, his continued and extensive participation in AA, 
and the testimonials from his AA sponsor, friends, co-workers, and family members show 
that Applicant’s epiphany was in June 2018, when he recognized for the first time that he 
had a serious alcohol-abuse problem and began to address it. He also recognized that, 
for the first time in his life, he had a meaningful and rewarding job, and that he would lose 
it if he did not change his lifestyle. While the possibility of relapse cannot be excluded, the 
evidence indicates that he is serious about maintaining sobriety and has taken specific 
steps to change his behavior. However, insufficient time has passed since his last DUI to 
establish this mitigating condition. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d) are not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged his 
excessive alcohol consumption, completed a 12-week substance-abuse treatment 
program in October 2018, participated aggressively in AA, maintained regular contact 
with his AA sponsor, and abstained from alcohol since June 2018. However, I am not 
 
8 
 
satisfied that sufficient time has elapsed since his last DUI to demonstrate a “clear and 
established pattern” of abstinence. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR cross-alleges the DUI arrests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.f under 
this guideline. The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.”  
 
Applicant’s DUI arrests and their legal consequences establish the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(c): individual is currently on parole or probation.2 
 
The following mitigating conditions are relevant, but they are not established, for 
the reasons set out in the above discussion of Guideline G:  
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
                                                          
2 There is no evidence in the record showing that probation was specifically imposed, but the ignition 
interlock requirement is the functional equivalent of probation for the purposes of this guideline. 
 
9 
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, 
remorseful, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He has taken significant steps to change 
his lifestyle. However, his abstinence since June 2018 is insufficient to overcome the 
security concerns raised by his multiple DUI incidents. I am bound by the mandate of the 
Supreme Court in Egan, supra, which requires that “[S]ecurity clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
 
 If Applicant continues along his current path, he may well be able to qualify for a 
security clearance after more time has passed. See Directive E3.1.38 through E3.1.40 
(reconsideration authorized after one year). However, after weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guidelines G and J, and evaluating all the evidence currently 
before me in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption and alcohol-related criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
  
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
