 
1 
 
                              
 
                                
                    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
      
        
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02550  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Shirin Asgari, Attorney At Law, Griffith Young & Lass 
 
 
June 19, 2019 
_________ _____ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.  The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2019.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on March 21, 
2019, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 8, 2019. The Government 
offered three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant called one witness and offered nine exhibits, 
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, which were admitted without objection.  
 
2 
 
He also testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
May 28, 2019. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
the Russian Federation. Department Counsel provided a ten-page summary of the 
facts, supported by twenty-three Government documents pertaining to Russia.  
(Government Exhibit 3).  The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary.  Applicant had no objection.  I take administrative notice of the facts included 
in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not 
subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and is married to a registered foreign national from 
Russia.  He has a Bachelor’s of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit G.)  He holds the position of Program Manager with a defense 
contractor.  Applicant has never held a security clearance before.  He began working for 
his current employer in 2016.         
 
  Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen, who was born on a U.S. Air Force Base.    
His parents, both his father and step-mother, are native-American citizens, who served 
in the U.S. Air Force while Applicant was growing up.  As a “military brat”, Applicant has 
traveled with his parents to a variety of duty stations around the world on military work 
assignments.      
 
 Applicant’s step-mother served in the U.S. Air Force for twenty-three years 
before she retired in 2009.  Applicant’s father served twenty years until he retired in 
2001.  Both his father and step-mother currently work for government contractors and 
hold SCI-level clearances.       
 
 Applicant met a woman in Beijing, China, who later became his wife, while 
working as a traveling engineer for a U.S. company.  She was a Russian national who 
was in China working on her Master’s degree in Linguistics, and studying Chinese.  
Applicant explained that they really hit it off, spent time together and worked on their 
relationship after that.  (Tr. p. 33.)  Applicant and his wife were married in February 
2016, and they have known each other for seven years.  She will be applying for her full 
U.S. citizenship by the end of May 2019.  Applicant’s wife works as a paralegal for a law 
firm, where she has worked for the past two years.  (Tr. pp. 44-45).     
    
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-law are citizens and residents of Russia.  
His father-in-law served as a Major in the Russian military.  His job centered around 
food service, and he stayed in longer than required in order to receive educational 
benefits.  (Tr. p. 37.)  He left the military in 2000 and he has not been involved with the 
Russian Government in any capacity since then.  Applicant has met him on two 
occasions.  He does not speak English and Applicant does not speak Russian and so 
communication is difficult.  Applicant has no future plans to return to Russia.  (Tr. p. 39.)  
He has no details concerning Applicant’s employment nor has he even shown an 
interest.    
  
 Applicant’s mother-in-law also served in the Russian military from 1990 to 1994 
in order to obtain educational benefits.  While in the military, she served as an 
administrative assistant.  She currently works as an Engineer.  Applicant does not 
believe the company is associated with the Russian Government in in any capacity.  (Tr. 
p. 41.)  Applicant’s mother in law does not speak English and is unable to communicate 
with the Applicant.  She has no details concerning Applicant’s employment.   
 
 In June 2014, on a trip to Moscow to visit his wife, in a passing social situation, 
Applicant was introduced to two friends of Applicant’s wife who are citizens and 
residents of Russia.  They are not friends of the Applicant.  Applicant does not talk with 
them and has no contact with them.  One of the women was employed as an 
administrative assistance for the Russian Government and was a friend of Applicant’s 
wife, but they had a falling out and are no longer friends.  Applicant’s wife no longer 
speaks with her.  The other woman, a friend of Applicant’s wife, is currently studying in 
China for her own Master’s degree.  Applicant’s wife no longer has contact with her.  
(Tr. p. 44.)     
 
 Applicant testified that he understands his responsibility while holding a security 
clearance to report any foreign contact and to never compromise national security under 
any circumstances.  Applicant further stated that if he were placed in a situation where a 
foreign national was attempting to get information from him that he knew they were not 
entitled to, or that he should not be sharing, he would immediately report the contact to 
his security officer.  (Tr. p. 45.) 
 
 Applicant’s father, who holds a security clearance, testified that Applicant is 
trustworthy and responsible, and will not let his relationship with his wife or in-laws ever 
influence his dedication and loyalties to the United States.  His father also states that he 
and his company security officer are cognizant of the Russian foreign contact concern in 
his family, and regularly monitors the situation to ensure that no security risk exists.  (Tr. 
pp. 22- 31.) 
 
 Letters of recommendation from professional colleagues and friends of the 
Applicant attest to his professional behavior, strong work ethics, leadership skills, good 
moral character, honesty, trustworthiness and reliability.  He is considered to be a stellar 
employee and a valuable team member.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s performance review for the period from 2017 and 2018 reflects that 
he “exceeds” job requirements.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E).  While a student at a University, 
Applicant’s technical paper was published online in 2011.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts about the Russian 
Federation, also known as Russia.  Russia is one of the most aggressive, capable, and 
active, high risk locations for crime that affects the U.S. government interests.  Russian 
intelligence works diligently as collectors of sensitive U.S. technologies.  Not all 
countries seek unauthorized access to classified information in order to harm the United 
States.  Some countries seek such unauthorized access in order to reap the benefits of 
sensitive U.S technology for themselves.  Russia uses cyber operations as an 
instrument of intelligence collection to inform its decision-making and benefit its 
economic interests and Russian intelligence services have conducted sophisticated and 
large-scale hacking operations to collect sensitive U.S. business and technology 
information.  Other methods of collection include, Russian commercial and academic 
enterprises interacting with the West; recruitment of Russian immigrants with advanced 
technical skills by the Russian intelligence services; and Russian intelligence 
penetration of public and private enterprises, which enable the Russian government to 
obtain sensitive technical information from industry.  The areas of highest interest to 
Russian intelligence collectors include energy/alternative energy; biotechnology; 
defense technology; environmental protection; high-end manufacturing; and information 
and communications technology.  (Government Exhibit 3.) 
 
 Russia’s recently reported efforts to influence the 2016 U.S. Presidential election 
represent the most recent expression of Russia’s long standing desire to undermine the 
U.S. led liberal democratic order and it is noted that “these activities demonstrated a 
significant escalation in directness, level of activity, and scope of effort compared to 
previous operations.”  The 2016 influence campaign reflected Russian’s recognition of 
the worldwide effects that mass disclosure of U.S. Government and other private data 
has achieved in recent years.  Russia is continuing to develop capabilities to provide 
President Putin with options to use against the United States.  (Government Exhibit 3.)   
 
 Human rights issues continue to be a significant problem including extrajudicial 
killings; enforced disappearance; torture that was systematic and sometimes resulted in 
death and sometimes included punitive psychiatric incarcerations; harsh and life-
threatening conditions in prisons; arbitrary arrest and detention; lack of judicial 
independence; political prisoners; severe interference with privacy; severe restrictions 
on freedom of expression and the media; increasingly severe restriction on freedom of 
association, including laws on “foreign agents” and “undesirable foreign organizations”; 
and widespread corruption at all levels and in all branches of government.  The Russian 
government failed to take adequate steps to prosecute or punish most officials who 
committed abuses, resulting in a climate of impunity.  (Government Exhibit 3.)     
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7.  Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
          Applicant’s foreign family members includes his father-in-law, and mother in law, 
who are citizens and residents of Russia. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
 
7 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
 Having considered the fact that Russia presents a heightened risk to the national 
security of the U.S., the nature of the relationships with Applicant’s wife’s family there do 
not pose a security risk.  Applicant has little or no contact with his in-laws, and does not 
speak their language, nor do they speak his.  Applicant was introduced to two Russian 
friends of his wife’s.  His wife no longer has any further contact with the one who was at 
one time associated with the Russian Government, and little or no contact with the 
linguist who is working toward her Master’s degree and currently studying Chinese in 
Beijing.  Applicant is an American citizen whose parents served life-time military 
careers.  His parents currently work for defense contractors and hold high-level security 
clearances.  The Applicant, as well as his father, is cognizant of the sensitivity of the 
relationship with his wife and the importance of protecting the national secrets.  
Applicant resides with his spouse, who is from Russia, but she too is ingrained into the 
American culture, and is simply awaiting to be eligible to become a citizen.  There is 
nothing in the record to show that these foreign contacts pose a heightened risk of 
foreign influence.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), has been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
There is compelling evidence showing that Applicant’s wife’s family in Russian do 
not pose a heightened risk of foreign influence.  It is noted that Russia continues to act 
as one of the most active, aggressive and capable collectors of intelligence targeting the 
U.S.  However, there is sufficient information in this record to prove that Applicant’s 
casual connections with his father-in-law and mother-in-law in Russia do not pose a 
security risk. Everything the Applicant has was given to him by the U.S., including his 
job and his education.  Applicant has no plans of ever returning to Russia.  Applicant’s 
wife plans to become a naturalized citizen as soon as she is eligible.  Applicant’s 
relationship with Russia does not subject him to foreign influence that could cause him 
to make decisions that are against the national interests.     
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concern.    
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:, through 1.c.  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
