 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-11920 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter notarized on April 8, 2014, Applicant admitted three of the 13 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. This represents an 
admission to about $2,000 of the over $26,000 in delinquent debt alleged. The case 
was assigned to me on May 5, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
 
 
 
2 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 9, 2014, setting the hearing for May 29, 
2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Exhibits (Exs) 1-6, which were accepted into the record 
without objection. Applicant offered testimony and 14 documents, which were accepted 
without objection as Exs. A-N. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received on 
June 9, 2014. Also on June 9, 2014, Department Counsel forwarded seven additional 
documents from Applicant without objection. They were accepted into the record as 
Exs. 0-U. The record was then closed.  
 
    Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old security officer who has worked for the same employer 
for the past 11 years. He completed three years of post-secondary education. He has 
three children and is presently engaged to be married.  
 
In 2006, Applicant had manageable financial issues. (Tr. 84) He decided to 
pursue an associate’s degree to earn the proper certification for pursuing a bachelor’s 
degree in homeland security. He learned of a local institution offering an abbreviated 
program yielding a similar certification for only about $10,000. He took out student 
loans, enrolled in the program, and completed about six months of study. Applicant then 
found a job and made payments on his student loans until November 2007, when he 
lost his position. At that point, he only had a $10 an hour part-time position on which to 
rely for income. Consequently, he abandoned his plans to seek a bachelor’s degree in 
homeland security.  
 
In 2009, Applicant’s part-time employer offered him a full-time position that 
included superior pay and a company car. Applicant and his son bought a house in his 
son’s name because he had better credit. Applicant paid most of the mortgage 
payments, about $2,300 a month. (Tr. 86) By 2010, Applicant was reduced in hours to 
being a part-time employee again. Applicant and his son eventually abandoned the 
property when they no longer could afford it. (Tr. 23) It ultimately went into foreclosure. 
(Tr. 87) Other related debts were neglected, including Applicant’s student loans. (Tr. 23-
24) Applicant became a full-time employee again in 2011, but at a reduced rate of about 
$14.50 an hour. This helped him pay some, but not all, of his obligations. Around this 
time, Applicant divorced his first wife. He produced no evidence indicating how this 
divorce impacted his finances.  
 
In 2012, Applicant reviewed his student loans, which had risen from a debt of 
$10,000 to one of about $24,000 due to fees, costs, and interest. That balance kept 
rising. The processing entity for the loans also kept changing. The changes regarding 
the accounts were very confusing. Meanwhile, by 2013, the potential of defense 
sequestration and employment insecurity increased. (Tr. 27-28) Applicant was retained 
by his employer, but his salary was cut again. This most recent cut prevented him from 
instituting more than initial measures to address his student loans.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Around the same time, Applicant received notice from his county that he owed 
taxes from 2009. Applicant denied having any past-due tax liability, but a recent audit 
showed that mistakes by his accountant between 2007 and 2009 resulted in a balance 
due. The resultant obligation was due in 30 days.  Soon thereafter, he learned from the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that he also owed federal taxes from 2009. Applicant 
told his employer, which withheld all the money it could on his behalf for the federal and 
county tax garnishments. Applicant borrowed money from some friends and other 
sources, but it was insufficient to cover all of his obligations and home expenses.   
 
The debts at issue in the SOR currently are as follows: 
 
1.a - $472 – Unpaid/denied. Applicant asserts that this utility bill belongs to his 
son from when they shared living in the same house. Applicant failed, however, to 
produce any documentary evidence showing he disputed this credit report entry with 
either the utility company or the credit reporting bureau, or paid the balance. (Tr. 62-64) 
 
1.b, – $12,000 – Status unclear. This student loan is handled by a publicly-traded 
U.S. corporation that originates, services, and collects student loans. Applicant’s latest 
activities with this creditor go back to at least April 2013. One recent payment toward 
this debt was shown as having been made. (Tr. 98) The evidence does not include a 
history of past transactions. (Ex. R) Applicant points to documentation to show that the 
debts at 1.g ($2,603) and 1.h ($4,045) have also been addressed. Those student loan- 
related debts, however, belonged to a nonprofit corporation before being turned over to 
a banking entity for collection. (Tr. 57) There is no evidence of a severance or 
reconsolidation of the loans that ever connected the publicly-traded corporation with the 
nonprofit corporation. A more direct nexus is needed to show that Applicant’s assertions 
are correct. (Tr. 57-58) 
 
1.c - $3,830 -  Unpaid. Applicant claimed that he recently made one payment of 
$60 on a purported repayment plan toward this debt. No evidence of either the 
transaction or the repayment plan, however, was submitted. (Tr. 79-80; Ex. N) 
 
1.d - $117 – Unpaid. No evidence of payment. Despite a copy of a settlement 
offer, there is no evidence that the offer has been accepted and satisfied. (Tr. 65) 
 
1.e - $162 – Paid. (Tr. 66; Ex. E) 
 
1.f - $1,130 – Unpaid. Applicant intends to settle this debt. (Tr. 67) Ex. U does 
not reflect sufficient information to show a payment was made on this account. 
 
1.g – 1-h – Unpaid - See above at 1.b. 
 
1.i - $105 – Paid. Ex. T, dated May 16, 2014.  
 
1.j – $621 – Unpaid. Applicant failed to provide evidence that this 
telecommunications account has been satisfied. (Tr. 69-70) 
 
 
 
 
4 
1.k - $182 – Paid. Evidence was provided showing that this overdue book charge 
from a local library was satisfied in May 2014. (Tr. 70-72) 
 
1.l - $65 – Unpaid. Applicant denies that this debt is his, but he did not provide 
evidence that he has formally disputed the credit report entry with either the entity or the 
credit reporting bureau. (Tr. 71-73) At hearing, Applicant stated that he would pay the 
balance, but no evidence of payment was forthcoming.  
 
1.m - $681 – Paid. Applicant provided evidence he has no outstanding balance 
with the state at issue. (Tr. 75-76-Ex. Q) It appears to have been satisfied through 
garnishment in 2012.  
 
Applicant’s current finances are unclear, but indicate that he is not acquiring new 
delinquent debt. In 2013, his financial sheet reflected a monthly net remainder of about 
$1,300, but it did not reflect any outstanding debts. There is no documentary evidence 
showing that he received financial counseling that has successfully helped him address 
his debts. Applicant did not present a clear, practical, and workable plan for addressing 
the remainder of his delinquent debts, nor did he present evidence to show that such a 
plan has been successfully implemented.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
 
 
 
5 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts, amounting to about $26,000. While his oral testimony 
indicated a significant amount of progress had been made on the delinquent debts at 
issue, the documentary evidence offered shows minimal effort toward addressing those 
debts. Moreover, several of those efforts appear to have occurred only after the 
issuance of the SOR. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Applicant’s financial problems began by 2008. Fluctuations in his wages beyond 
his control affected his income, which, in turn, adversely affected his ability to meet all of 
his financial obligations. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) potentially applies. There is scant 
documentary evidence, however, showing that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Moreover, there is little documented evidence showing that he 
endeavored to work with his creditors, mitigate expenses in a responsible manner, or 
generate either additional or more stable employment until last year. Most of what has 
been done to address his delinquent debts has been ad hoc and very recent, principally 
the satisfaction of his $681 tax burden through garnishment in 2012 noted at 1.m, the 
$162 referenced at 1.e, and the recent payments for debts 1.i ($105) and 1.k ($182). 
Applicant’s methodology for choosing these creditors and making these payments is 
unclear. Testimony of additional payments to other cited creditors was unsupported.  
Therefore, neither AG ¶ 20(a) nor AG ¶ 20(b) apply.  
 
           There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. Moreover, the 
evidence shows that his efforts addressing these debts have been largely haphazard 
and relatively minor in light of his financial resources. Further, there is no evidence that 
he has formally disputed any of his debts. AG ¶ 20(c) through AG ¶ 20(e) do not apply.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment or emphasis.  
 
Applicant is a mature, credible, and earnest man who has maintained his current 
position for over a decade. He has pursued post-secondary education successfully. He 
made payments on his son’s house until the monthly expenses became too onerous. 
When he lost his primary job, he depended on his part-time employment for income until 
that position became full-time. He endured multiple ups and downs with his income at 
that work over several years.  
 
In his testimony, Applicant articulated a recent and ad hoc, but arguably 
productive, method for addressing the debts at issue. Applicant’s problem in this case is 
mostly an issue of documentary evidence. He has been given credit for those accounts 
for which documentary evidence of satisfaction or action was presented. However, 
despite a period of time after the hearing to submit additional materials, only four more 
documents were submitted.  
 
Ultimately, while this process does not require an applicant to satisfy all debts at 
issue, it does require a showing that an applicant has devised a workable and realistic 
payment plan or scheme to satisfy his debts. In addition, it requires a documented 
showing that such a plan or scheme has been successfully implemented. Here, 
exempting consideration of the confused status of Applicant’s student loans, Applicant’s 
ad hoc payments of only about $1,100 and unsubstantiated claims of payment or 
repayment plans sustain financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.h:   Against Applicant
 Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant
 Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
