 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-07138 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges one delinquent credit card debt 
for $32,331 originating from bank (A). Applicant established a payment plan and made 
payments until he became unemployed. His credit reports show a track record of debt 
resolution for numerous debts. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 5) On March 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On April 2, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegation and waived his right 
to a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated 
June 27, 2014, was provided to him on July 9, 2014.1 On August 5, 2014, Applicant 
responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on August 25, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a, and he 
provided mitigating information. (Item 5) His admissions are accepted as findings of 
fact.  
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old executive management consultant, who is seeking 
employment with a defense contractor. He honorably served on active duty in the U.S. 
Air Force from 1995 to 2006. In 1992, he married, and his four children were born in 
1995, 1998, 2001, and 2011. (Item 8)   
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, March 
14, 2012 Office of Personnel Management personnel subject interview (OPM PSI), and 
SOR response.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges one delinquent credit card debt for $32,331 owed to a 
bank (A).3 He closed the account, and subsequently received correspondence from a 
collection company seeking additional funds. He said he was unaware of the debt, and 
he asked A for proof of the charges. A did not provide proof of the charges. On May 5, 
2012, he signed an agreement with a credit company (CC) to negotiate settlement of his 
debt to A. On November 28, 2012, CC informed Appellant that the settlement amount 
for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was $10,000. Appellant provided proof that he made $638 
monthly payments from May 2012 to June 2013 and in August 2013 (15 payments 
totaling $9,570) to CC. The amount CC paid to A or A’s collection agent is unclear. In 
August 2013, Applicant lost his job and had to stop making the automatic bank 
payments to CC.       
 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated June 30, 2014, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated July 9, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 
30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s credit reports list numerous paid, current, and satisfactorily closed 
accounts, including two large mortgage accounts. (Items 6, 7) The only negative entry 
pertains to the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Items 6, 7) 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. There is no 
evidence that he has become employed and of his current financial status.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, OPM PSI, and SOR response.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges one delinquent credit card debt for $32,331 originating 
from A. Applicant had an established payment plan in June 2012 and was making 
progress. The debt is currently delinquent. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:      
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(d). AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because Applicant did not provide 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute and evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue. Applicant was making progress resolving the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a when 
he lost his job, and it was necessary for him to terminate his payments to CC. His loss 
of employment is a circumstance largely beyond his control. He settled, paid, kept 
current, or resolved numerous debts as indicated on his credit reports. He understands 
what he must do to establish and maintain his financial responsibility.4  
 
The Appeal Board explained that circumstances beyond one’s control can cause 
unresolved debt, and are not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant admitted 
responsibility for and took reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his SOR debt, 
establishing some good faith.5 He established and maintained contact with his creditor.6 
Applicant did not describe any financial counseling; however, there are clear indications 
the problem is being resolved and is under control. Once Applicant obtains employment, 
his financial problems are unlikely to recur; and they do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old executive management consultant, who is seeking 
employment with a defense contractor. He honorably served on active duty in the U.S. 
Air Force from 1995 to 2006. In 1992, he married, and his four children were born in 
1995, 1998, 2001, and 2011. He deserves substantial credit for supporting the U.S. 
Government during his active-duty service. He is sufficiently mature to understand and 
comply with his security responsibilities. There is every indication that he is loyal to the 
United States, the DOD, and his employer.   
 
Applicant is credited for admitting responsibility for his delinquent debt. He had 
an established payment plan, and from May 2012 to August 2013, he paid CC $9,570 to 
address a $10,000 debt owed to A. Applicant’s loss of employment caused him to stop 
making payments to CC, which is a circumstance largely beyond his control. He settled, 
paid, kept current, or otherwise resolved numerous non-SOR debts. The Appeal Board 
has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination). There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person, and he understands what he needs to do to 
establish and maintain his financial responsibility. There is simply no reason not to trust 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
him. Moreover, he established a “meaningful track record” of debt repayment. I am 
confident he will maintain his financial responsibility.7   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
7Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the 
security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative 
security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise 
made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and 
may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s clearance is conditional. 
