 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 12-04013 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has close ties and ongoing contact with his brother and sister-in-law in 
Israel. Personal conduct concerns are not established because Applicant did not intend 
to conceal these foreign contacts when he completed his security clearance application. 
Foreign influence concerns, heightened primarily because his sister-in-law is an officer in 
Israel’s military, are not fully mitigated. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and explaining why it was unable to grant a security clearance to Applicant. 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on February 26, 2014, and he 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). By letter dated May 6, 2014, Department Counsel provided 
discovery to Applicant of the potential Government exhibits (GEs). On May 15, 2014, 
the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and I scheduled a hearing for June 4, 2014. 
 
At the hearing, two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on June 
11, 2014. The Government requested that I take administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Israel and its foreign relations, including with the United States.1 Applicant 
did not object to the facts submitted for administrative notice or to my consideration of 
the source documents relied on by the Government. Applicant proposed no facts for 
administrative notice. Pursuant to my obligation to take administrative notice of the most 
current political conditions in evaluating Guideline B concerns (see ISCR Case No. 05-
11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007)), I informed the parties of my intent to take 
administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Government’s administrative notice 
request and of other relevant and material facts substantiated by the reliable source 
documentation.2 The facts administratively noticed are set forth in the Findings of Fact 
below. 
  
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleges Guideline B (foreign influence) security concerns because 
Applicant’s sister-in-law is a resident citizen of Israel (SOR 1.a) and a major in a branch 
of the Israeli military (SOR 1.c), and because Applicant’s brother is a resident of Israel 
(SOR 1.b). Under Guideline E (personal conduct), Applicant is alleged to have 
deliberately falsified his July 2011 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) by not disclosing his close and continuing contact with his sister-in-
law in response to whether, in the last seven years, he had close and continuing contact 
with any foreign national to whom he is bound by affection, influence, or obligation 
(SOR 2.a). 
                                                 
1
The Government’s request for administrative notice, dated May 6, 2014, and source documents were 
incorporated in the record as a hearing exhibit. Department Counsel provided Applicant with a copy 
before the hearing, and he indicated that he had an adequate opportunity to review it. (Tr. 16.) 
 
2 
The Government’s request for administrative notice was based on the U.S. State Department’s Country 
Specific Information: Israel, the West Bank and Gaza, dated February 6, 2014 (I); the National 
Counterintelligence Center’s Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage–2000 (II) and its Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage–2005 (III); excerpts from the Interagency OPSEC Support Staff’s Intelligence Threat 
Handbook, dated June 2004 (IV); the Congressional Research Services’ publication CRS Report for 
Congress–Israel: Background and U.S. Relations, dated February 28, 2014 (V); an order from the U.S. 
Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security, dated May 5, 2010 (VI); and six news 
releases from Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security reporting export violations committed by U.S. 
firms, and in one case, by an Israeli citizen (VII-XII). 
 
 
 3 
When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted the Guideline B allegations. 
Concerning the Guideline E allegation, he acknowledged that his response to the e-
QIP’s foreign contact inquiry was “erroneous,” but he denied that he deliberately failed 
to disclose his contacts with his Israeli sister-in-law. He attributed his error to “a simple 
mental lapse, an honest mistake.”  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to his sister-in-law being an Israeli resident citizen and a 
major in the Israeli military, and to his brother being a resident of Israel, are accepted 
and incorporated as findings of fact. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and 
transcript, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old engineer, who has worked for a DOD contractor since 
March 2005. (GE 1.) Applicant seeks his first DOD security clearance for his duties in 
engineering research and development. 
 
 Applicant and his two brothers (both older) are native U.S. citizens. In June 2005, 
Applicant was awarded his master’s degree in engineering. He married his spouse, also 
a native U.S. citizen, about two weeks later. (GE 1.) 
 
 Around 2005, the younger of Applicant’s brothers began dating his future wife. 
An Israeli college student who was spending the semester in the United States, she was 
in an Israeli program that allowed her to attend college before fulfilling her commitment 
of about four years of active duty military service for Israel. (Tr. 32-34.) Applicant’s 
brother was employed by a U.S. defense contractor, although there is no evidence that 
he held a security clearance. (Tr. 45.) Starting in 2006, Applicant had contact with his 
brother and future sister-in-law once a year when they visited him. In September 2007, 
Applicant’s sister-in-law switched to her present branch of the Israeli military. (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother moved to Israel around 2007. (Tr. 33.) He continued to 
maintain a residence in the United States until 2012. (GEs 1, 2.) In September 2008, 
Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law married in Israel. Applicant traveled to Israel for the 
wedding with his immediate family (parents, older brother and his wife) and some 
extended family members (aunts, uncles, and cousins). Over the course of his nine 
days in Israel, Applicant also went on sightseeing trips. (GE 2; Tr. 30.) 
 
 Applicant and his spouse traveled to Israel and Jordan for pleasure in July 2010. 
They spent time with Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law, and they also had dinner with 
Applicant’s sister-in-law’s family during their trip. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 30, 43-44.) Applicant 
had no problems with Israeli authorities during either of his two trips to the country. (GE 
2.) 
 
 On July 21, 2011, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an e-QIP. 
Applicant provided U.S. addresses for his immediate relatives (parents, siblings, and 
parents-in-law); including for his brother living in Israel because “it was the address . . . 
 
 4 
that he was keeping in the United States at that time.” Applicant did not consider at the 
time that the U.S. government would want to know that his brother was actually living in 
Israel. (Tr. 29, 39.) Applicant did not disclose his contacts or relationship with his Israeli 
sister-in-law, and he responded “No” to question 19 concerning foreign contacts, which 
inquired as follows: 
 
Do you have or have you had close and/or continuing contact with foreign 
nationals within the last 7 years with whom you, your spouse, or your 
cohabitant are bound by affection, influence, and/or obligation? Include 
associates, as well as relatives, not already listed in Section 18. (A foreign 
national is defined as any person who is not a citizen or national of the 
U.S.). 
 
In response to question 20C concerning any foreign countries visited in the last seven 
years, Applicant disclosed trips to the Bahamas for tourism in June 2005; to Israel in 
September 2008 “to visit family or friends;” and to Israel and Jordan in July 2010 for 
tourism and to visit family and friends. (GE 1.) Applicant attributes his failure to disclose 
his contacts with his Israeli sister-in-law to “a simple mental lapse.” He expounded at his 
hearing, as follows: 
 
Immediately my mind started thinking, okay. We’ve been to the Bahamas, 
we’ve been to Israel. Have I met anyone over there that are foreign 
nationals that I’m continuing to be bound to affection and my instinct said 
no. I haven’t met any close friends over there during those trips. And so I 
checked off no without—I think without reading carefully the following 
sentence which says include associates as well as relatives not already 
listed in section 18. And this was 2010 [sic]. She had been my sister-in-
law for two years. It was kind of new. Just wasn’t burned into my—into my 
mind yet that I had a family member who is, in fact, a foreign national. (Tr. 
26.)  
 
 On September 7, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant disclosed that he had 
ongoing contacts with his sister-in-law, an Israeli citizen, whom his brother first met 
around 2005. Since his brother’s marriage in September 2008, Applicant has had email 
contact six times a year and personal contact once or twice yearly in the United States, 
when his brother and sister-in-law visit from Israel. Applicant indicated that his brother 
and sister-in-law continue to maintain an apartment in the United States, although their 
primary residence is in Israel. Applicant did not know his sister-in-law’s birthdate or her 
place of birth. About her occupation, he knew only that she has been in the Israeli 
military (branch unknown) for four years, holds the rank of captain, and works with 
computers. Applicant added that his sister-in-law was unaware that he was being 
considered for a DOD security clearance. She had not shown any undue interest in his 
employment. Applicant admitted that he had met his sister-in-law’s parents, but he had 
spoken to them only twice. Her mother works as an interior decorator, and her father 
installs security doors on homes and businesses. Applicant also disclosed that his 
 
 5 
sister-in-law has a younger sibling, who is in high school in Israel. When asked why he 
had not disclosed these foreign contacts on his e-QIP, Applicant responded that he did 
not think of them as friends. About his foreign travel, Applicant denied any problems 
with customs or law enforcement during his trips. (GE 2.)  
 
 In September 2013, the DOD CAF asked Applicant about his foreign contacts. 
Applicant responded affirmatively to whether he had any relative (other than immediate 
family member) employed by a foreign government, military, or business. He indicated 
that his sister-in-law has been in the Israeli military since September 2005 and affiliated 
with her current branch since September 2007.3 He listed her rank as major with duties 
involving base “ERP development & support.”4 Applicant also answered “Yes” to 
whether any immediate family member, other relative, friend, or business associate 
lives in a foreign country. He disclosed the Israeli residency of his brother and the Israeli 
residency and citizenship of his sister-in-law. He reported in-person contact with them 
twice a year since 2006, at Christmas and in the summer during family visits. Applicant 
also disclosed this contact with his sister-in-law in response to whether he had ever had 
contacts with any foreign citizens not related to official U.S. government business. (GE 
2.) 
 
 At the request of the DOD CAF, Applicant reviewed the report of his September 
2011 personal subject interview. Applicant updated information about his brother’s 
apartment in the United States in that it was sold in 2012, about his brother and sister-
in-law’s address in Israel, and about his sister-in-law’s military rank and service branch 
in Israel. Applicant corrected the record to indicate that his sister-in-law had two 
younger brothers in addition to the sister previously disclosed, and that he had been 
accompanied by several family members when he went to Israel for his brother’s 
wedding in September 2008. (GE 2.) 
 
  In 2013, Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law moved into a new home that they 
had built in Israel. (Tr. 37.) Applicant’s brother works as a liaison for a manufacturing 
company in Israel that makes components for, and apparently is now owned by, the 
U.S. defense contractor for which he had worked in the United States. Applicant’s 
brother ensures that the Israel-based manufacturer meets its production schedule for 
the U.S. defense contractor. (Tr. 31.) Applicant has telephone contact with his brother 
about once a month. They also correspond by email about once a month. Applicant’s 
contact with his sister-in-law is more sporadic. He speaks to her if she answers the 
home phone when he calls his brother, and he seldom emails her directly. Usually, “it’s 
just to share some pictures of the kids or something like that.” (Tr. 27-28, 36.) Applicant 
does not discuss work, politics, or religion with his sister-in-law. (Tr. 27.) Applicant 
continues to have in-person contact with his brother and sister-in-law when they visit the 
                                                 
3 
Applicant contacted his sister-in-law for information about her current status in the Israeli military 
because he knew that he had “to get these things straight.” (Tr. 35-36.) He informed his sister-in-law that 
he needed accurate information for his security clearance. (Tr. 36.) 
 
4 
Applicant testified that his sister-in-law “logistically keeps computer systems running.” (Tr. 25.) 
 
 6 
United States, which is “typically in the summer and then around Christmastime” for 
about a week each time. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 Applicant believes that his sister-in-law plans to remain in the Israeli military for 
her career. Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law have two children, a nine-month-old 
infant and a two-year-old toddler. (Tr. 42.) His sister-in-law has good daycare through 
the military. (Tr. 41.) Applicant does not know whether his sister-in-law has an Israeli 
security clearance. He has not asked her about her clearance status. (Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother owns a home in the United States, which had previously 
belonged to his grandparents. Applicant has been led to understand that in the future, 
about 20 years from now, Applicant’s brother intends to spend half his time in Israel and 
half in the United States. (Tr. 37-38.) To Applicant’s knowledge, his brother has not 
acquired Israeli citizenship. (Tr. 44.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Administrative notice is not taken of the source documents in their entirety, but of 
specific facts properly noticed and relevant and material to the issues.5 After reviewing 
the documents submitted by the parties concerning Israel and its foreign relations, 
including with the United States, I take administrative notice of the following facts: 
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy of about 7.71 million people with a modern 
economy with ongoing regional security concerns. Despite the instability and armed 
conflict that have marked Israel’s relations within the region since it came into existence, 
Israel has developed a diversified, technologically advanced market economy focused 
on high-technology electronic and biomedical equipment, chemicals, and transport 
equipment. Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Golan Heights, and East 
Jerusalem as a result of the 1967 war. In 1994, the Palestinian Authority was 
established in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, although the Islamic Resistance 
Movement (HAMAS), a U.S. designated foreign terrorist organization (FTO), took 
control of the Gaza Strip in June 2007. Terrorist attacks are a continuing threat in Israel, 
many of which are directed at American interests. The U. S. State Department advises 
U.S. citizens to take due precautions when traveling to Israel, the West Bank, and 
Gaza. U.S. citizens, including tourists, students, residents, and U.S. government 
                                                 
5
 Concerning the Government’s request that I take administrative notice of the fact that Israeli military 
officers have been implicated in collecting or attempting to collect protected technology from the United 
States, the incident reported in the Intelligence Threat Handbook occurred in 1986. Like the Jonathan 
Pollard case, that information must be evaluated in light of its dated nature. As for the Department of 
Commerce press releases, which were presumably presented to substantiate that Israel actively pursues 
collection of U.S. economic and proprietary information, none of the cases involved Applicant personally 
or involved espionage through any family relationships. The anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of 
other U.S. citizens is of decreased relevance to an assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, given 
there is no evidence that Applicant or any member of his family was involved in any aspect of the cited 
cases. 
 
 
 
 7 
personnel, have been injured or killed by terrorists while in Israel, the West Bank, and 
Gaza. All persons applying for entry to Israel, the West Bank, or Gaza are subject to 
security and police record checks by the Israeli government and may be denied entry or 
exit without explanation. The Israeli government considers U.S. citizens who also hold 
Israeli citizenship or have a claim to dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration 
and other legal purposes. Children born in the United States to Israeli parents usually 
acquire both U.S. and Israeli nationality at birth. U.S. citizen visitors have been 
subjected to questioning and thorough searches by Israeli authorities on entry or 
departure. Israeli authorities have denied access of some U.S. citizens to U.S. consular 
officers, lawyers, and family members during temporary detention. 
 
The relationship between Israel and the United States is friendly and yet 
complex. Since 1948, the United States and Israel have a close friendship based on 
common democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. In 1985, Israel 
and the United States concluded a Free Trade Agreement designed to strengthen 
economic ties by eliminating tariffs. The United States is Israel’s largest single trading 
partner. Other than Afghanistan, Israel is the leading recipient of U.S. foreign aid and is 
a frequent purchaser of major U.S. weapons systems. 
 
Israel and the United States do not have a mutual defense agreement, although 
the United States remains committed to Israel’s security and well-being, predicated on 
Israel maintaining a “qualitative military edge” over other countries in its region. The 
United States is the principal international proponent of the Arab-Israeli peace process. 
Negotiations to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are presently at a stalemate. Israel 
perceives threats from Iran and Iranian-sponsored non-state actors, such as the 
Lebanese Shiite group Hezbollah, as well as Hamas and other Sunni Islamist 
Palestinian militants in Gaza. Israel’s concerns about a nuclear-weapons-capable Iran 
as an imminent threat to its security have led Israel to seek increasingly punitive 
international measures against Iran’s nuclear program. Recently, Israel has become 
more concerned about the threats to its security posed by violent jihadist terrorist 
groups in light of the political upheaval in Egypt and Syria’s civil war. Demographic 
trends in Israel have led to the emergence of nationalistic and conservative elements, 
more hawkish on foreign policy and security. 
  
Strong U.S. congressional support for Israel has resulted in the country being 
designated as a “major non-NATO ally” and receiving preferential treatment in bidding 
for U.S. defense contracts and access to expanded weapons systems at lower prices. 
U.S. bilateral aid to Israel is in the form of foreign military financing (FMF). Under a 10-
year bilateral memorandum of understanding, the United States is committed to $3.1 
billion in FMF annually to Israel from fiscal years 2013 to 2018, subject to continuing 
congressional appropriations. Israel uses approximately 75% of its FMF to purchase 
arms from the United States. Israel and the United States are partners in the “Star 
Wars” missile defense project, and have concluded numerous treaties and agreements 
aimed at strengthening military ties, including agreements on mutual defense 
assistance, procurement, and security of information. Israel and the United States have 
established joint groups to further military cooperation. The two countries participate in 
 
 8 
joint military exercises and collaborate on military research and weapons development. 
U.S. military aid has helped Israel build a domestic defense industry, and Israel in turn 
is one of the top 10 exporters of arms worldwide. 
  
The transfer by sale of U.S. defense articles or services to Israel and all other 
foreign countries is subject to the Arms Export Control Act and implementing regulations 
as well as the 1952 Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between the United States 
and Israel. The United States has acted to restrict aid and/or rebuked Israel in the past 
for possible improper use of U.S.-supplied military equipment. The United States is 
concerned about Israeli settlements; Israel’s sales of sensitive security equipment and 
technology, especially to China; Israel’s inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual 
property; Israel’s suspected use of U.S.-made cluster bombs against civilian populated 
areas in Lebanon; and espionage-related cases implicating Israeli officials. Israeli 
military officials have been implicated in economic espionage activity in the United 
States. U.S. government employees (e.g., Jonathan Pollard in 1985, who acted as an 
agent for Israel; Lawrence Franklin, who pled guilty in 2006 to disclosing classified 
information to an Israeli diplomat; and Ben-Ami Kadish, who pled guilty in 2009 to 
conspiracy to act as an unregistered agent for Israel) and U.S. government contractors 
have been implicated in providing classified and sensitive information to Israel. Israel 
was listed as one of the nations that aggressively targeted U.S. economic intelligence in 
2000. 
 
Unlike China and Russia, both of which were specifically identified as aggressive 
collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technologies, Israel was not named 
specifically in the National Counterintelligence Executive’s (NCIX) Annual Report to 
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage—2005. However, 
there have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. 
restricted, dual-use technology to Israel. In March 2005, a U.S. company pleaded guilty 
to exporting digital oscilloscopes to Israel without a license. The items were reportedly 
capable of being utilized in the development of weapons of mass destruction and in 
missile delivery fields. In 2009, a U.S. government employee, Ben-Ami Kadish, pleaded 
guilty to one count of conspiracy to act as an unregistered agent of Israel. In May 2010, 
the U.S. Department of Commerce assessed a civil penalty of $76,000 against a 
company, in part for exporting controlled oscilloscopes to Israel in 2007 through a 
scheme to avoid the required export license. In March 2011, a U.S. company agreed to 
pay a civil penalty to settle allegations that it violated Export Administration Regulations 
related to the export of titanium alloy and aluminum bar to Israel in July 2007 without the 
required export license. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 9 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern about foreign influence is set forth in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
 10 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law live and work in Israel. Applicant 
understandably has some affection for his brother. He traveled to Israel for his brother’s 
wedding in September 2008 and with his spouse to visit his brother and sister-in-law in 
July 2010. Applicant has telephone contact with his brother about once a month. They 
also correspond by email once a month. Applicant’s contact with his sister-in-law is 
more sporadic. He talks to her if she happens to answer the family phone when he calls 
his brother. Applicant has in-person contact with his brother and sister-in-law at 
Christmastime and in the summers. AG ¶ 7(a) is implicated if contacts create a 
heightened risk of foreign influence: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of 
the family ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are 
relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government 
coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated with, or 
dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign 
government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
Israel and the United States have long had a close friendship. The United States 
is committed to Israel’s security, to the extent of ensuring that Israel maintains a 
“qualitative military edge” in its region. Israel receives preferential treatment in bidding 
for U.S. contracts and substantial economic aid from the United States. However, even 
friendly nations may have interests that are not completely aligned with the United 
States. As noted by the DOHA Appeal Board, “the United States has a compelling 
interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, 
organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.” See ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). Recent 
reports of economic espionage do not show direct involvement by the Israeli 
government targeting the United States. However, U.S. government employees and 
 
 11 
U.S. government contractors have been implicated in economic espionage activity in 
the United States to benefit Israel. The United States remains concerned about Israeli 
settlements, Israel’s military sales to other countries such as China, and Israel’s 
inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual property. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s brother or his sister-in-law in Israel have 
been targeted or pressured. Considering the nature of the Israeli government and 
society, it is unlikely that the Israeli government would attempt coercive means to obtain 
sensitive information. There is no evidence that Israel has used coercive methods. 
However, it does not eliminate the possibility that Israel would employ some non-
coercive measures in an attempt to exploit a relative. Israel faces threats by jihadist 
groups, other terrorist organizations, and states in the region that are avowedly anti-
Israel. Within Israel, many of those attacks are directed at, not only Jewish or Israeli 
interests, but American interests as well. However, a distinction must be made between 
the risk to physical security that may exist and the types of concern that rise to the level 
of compromising Applicant’s ability to safeguard national security. Israel does not 
condone the indiscriminate acts of violence against its citizens or tourists in Israel and 
strictly enforces security measures designed to combat and minimize the risk presented 
by terrorism. Also, there is no evidence that terrorists have approached or threatened 
Applicant’s brother or sister-in-law for any reason. 
 
Yet, there are several factors, which collectively, if not also on their own, create 
the heightened risk addressed in AG ¶ 7(a), and which create a potential conflict of 
interest under AG ¶ 7(b), which provides as follows: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s brother enjoys the protections of U.S. citizenship, and he works for a 
company now owed by a U.S. defense contractor. Yet, he remains subject to Israeli 
laws because of his residency in Israel, and he is married to an officer in the Israeli 
military. In addition to having to comply with the obligations of her Israeli citizenship and 
residency, Applicant’s sister-in-law presumably is required to directly serve Israel’s 
interests and to follow the orders of her military superiors, which may at times be 
adverse to the interests of the United States. Furthermore, Applicant’s sister-in-law’s 
military duties involve information technology, a field targeted for economic collection 
and espionage activities in the past. The primary risk may be indirect (i.e., through his 
brother’s marital bond), but the evidence also establishes that Applicant has positive 
relations of his own to his sister-in-law. Applicant does not know whether his sister-in-
law holds an Israeli security clearance. However, he has told his sister-in-law that he is 
being considered for a U.S. DOD security clearance. There is no indication that 
Applicant’s sister-in-law would unethically use that information for her advantage or to 
benefit Israel. Yet, without knowing more about her military duties, activities, and 
associates in Israel, the risk of a potential conflict of interest cannot be ruled out. 
 
 12 
Concerning potential factors in mitigation, AG ¶ 8(a) provides as follows:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is difficult to satisfy because of Applicant’s family ties to his brother and sister-
in-law in Israel; Israel’s history of economic espionage directed at the United States; 
and the risk of terrorist activity in Israel, which has led the U.S. State Department to 
strongly caution travelers to the country. 
 
Applicant has no direct ties to Israel of his own. He has demonstrated no 
particular affinity for Israel. His travels to Israel were for family reasons and tourism. 
Nonetheless, given the close family ties, Applicant also cannot arguably make a case 
for mitigation under the first prong of AG ¶ 8(b), which provides that the loyalty or 
obligation to the family members be so minimal: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant could satisfy AG ¶ 8(b) by an adequate showing of deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. Applicant is a life-long 
resident and citizen of the United States. He is married to a U.S. native citizen. He was 
educated in the United States and has chosen to make his career here. His only ties to 
Israel are familial and not chosen by him other than to understandably maintain sibling 
ties. Even so, the foreign influence guidelines acknowledge that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, 
such as a family member. See ISCR Case No. 08-10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
Applicant has not been tested in this regard. Some concerns arise about whether he 
would recognize and react appropriately to any attempt at undue foreign influence, 
given it did not occur to him that he should be circumspect with his sister-in-law about 
his DOD security clearance application or that the Government might want to know that 
his brother was residing in Israel and not in his apartment in the United States (see 
Guideline E, infra). Under the circumstances, it is difficult to fully apply AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation,” cannot reasonably apply because of the ongoing sibling ties. Applicant has 
regular contact with his brother in Israel. Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law intend to 
remain residents of Israel, and Applicant has no reason to believe that his sister-in-law 
 
 13 
plans to resign her commission in the Israeli military in the near future. The foreign 
influence concerns are not fully mitigated in this case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are set forth in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant responded “No” to question 19 on his July 2011 e-QIP concerning 
whether he had “close and/or continuing contact with foreign nationals within the last 7 
years with whom [he, his spouse, or his cohabitant] are bound by affection, influence, 
and or obligation?” A reasonable inference of falsification arises because Applicant’s 
sister-in-law is a resident citizen of Israel. Applicant indicated during his subject 
interview that he has known his sister-in-law, an Israeli citizen, since approximately 
2005, and that he had in-person contact with her once a year before her marriage to his 
brother in September 2008. After she became his sister-in-law, they have had email 
contact about six times a year and in-person contact about twice a year. Applicant has 
consistently denied intentional falsification, attributing his admittedly erroneous 
response on the e-QIP to “a simple mental lapse.” He misread the question as 
pertaining solely to whether he had met any close friends in Israel during his trips. He 
added that it “just wasn’t burned into [his]—into [his] mind yet that [he] had a family 
member who is in fact a foreign national.” (Tr. 26.) 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification 
cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing 
alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind 
when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under 
Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to 
present evidence to explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 
(App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). Applicant’s relationship to his sister-in-law is conspicuously 
absent from his e-QIP, and Applicant’s decision to provide his brother’s U.S. address in 
 
 14 
lieu of his brother’s actual residency in Israel could be viewed as further evidence of an 
intent to conceal his ties to Israel. However, Applicant plausibly explained that his 
brother maintained his U.S. apartment until 2012, and the evidence shows that 
Applicant listed his foreign travel to Israel “to visit family or friends.” When asked during 
his September 2011 subject interview about his foreign contacts and the reason for his 
trips to Israel, Applicant disclosed his ties to his Israeli sister-in-law. Under the 
circumstances, his denial of any intent to conceal is accepted as credible. Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 16(a) is inapplicable without the requisite intent: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant corrected his error by disclosing his family ties in Israel to the OPM 
investigator. AG ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” applies. 
AG ¶ 17(d) is established in that Applicant’s disclosures of his foreign ties during his 
interview, in response to DOD CAF interrogatories, and at his hearing, are positive 
steps to correct his mistake on his e-QIP. AG ¶ 17(d) provides as follows: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
AG ¶ 17(f), “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability,” also applies in that deliberate falsification of the e-QIP was not established.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).6 Furthermore, in weighing these whole-person factors in a foreign influence 
case, the Appeal Board has held that: 
                                                 
6
 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 15 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still 
pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that 
an applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to 
classified information. Even good people can pose a security risk because 
of facts and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 
01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
Applicant is a victim of circumstance in that one of his brothers married an officer 
in the Israeli military. It would be unreasonable to expect Applicant to terminate his 
personal relationship with his brother over this marriage. At the same time, Applicant 
has the burden of overcoming the security concerns that arise from his ongoing ties and 
contacts to his brother and sister-in-law in Israel. Applicant heightened the security risk 
somewhat by informing his sister-in-law that he is being considered for a DOD security 
clearance, and he is somewhat naive about the risk of foreign influence.7 It is well 
settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). After considering the facts and 
circumstances before me in light of the adjudicative guidelines, I cannot conclude that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
                                                 
7 
Applicant’s testimony is illustrative: 
 
As I understand it the premise of this case is or the reason for being denied security 
clearance is not because I have an Israeli—a sister-in-law who is Israeli and in the 
military, but rather that I deliberately failed to disclose her. And if I had not made the 
mistake on the initial e-QIP security clearance application it is my opinion that the 
clearance would have sailed through with no questions asked. (Tr. 24.) 
 
 16 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
