1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-03000
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on October 15, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 20, 2014, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 1; Item 5; Item 10.2
Item 1.3
2
Applicant received the SOR, and she submitted a notarized, written response to
the SOR allegations dated March 17, 2014. She requested a decision on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on May 28, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on June 19,
2014. She had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not submit a response. DOHA assigned
this case to me on August 11, 2014. The Government submitted eleven exhibits, which
have been marked as Items 1-11 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to
the SOR has been marked and admitted as Item 3, and the SOR has been marked and
admitted as Item 1.
 Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the factual
allegations in the SOR. Instead, she responded to the overall concern, denying that she
and her husband lived beyond their financial means. She explained the reason for her
financial problems and acknowledged that some of her credit cards had not been paid.
Her answer is treated as a denial.  After a complete and thorough review of the1
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant, who is 56 years old, works for a DOD contractor as a consultant. She
began her current employment in October 2011.  2
Applicant was born and raised in Trinidad and Tobago. She and her family
emigrated to the United States many years ago. She became a United States citizen in
2008. She recently completed a certificate course through a local university. Applicant
married her first husband in 1978, and they divorced in 1984. They had one daughter,
who is 36 years old. She married her present husband in 1990. Her husband adopted
her daughter.3
In 2007, Applicant and her husband decided to sell their home (House A) and to
purchase a smaller home (House B) to reduce their monthly mortgage payment. They
Item 5.4
Items 5, 7, 8, 9.5
Item 5.6
Items 6, 8, 9.7
Item 5.8
3
retained the services of a real estate agent and signed a contract to sell House A. At the
same time, they purchase House B, a smaller and less expensive home. When House
A did not sell, they listed House B for rent through a real estate agent. They rented
House B for at least one year beginning in August 2008. During this time, they paid their
mortgages.4
In June 2009, Applicant was laid off from her job. Shortly thereafter, her husband
was laid off from his job. Financial problems ensued. In August 2009, Applicant and her
husband applied to the mortgage lender for House A for a loan modification. At the
same time, they sought mortgage and financial counseling through a local government
center. The mortgage lender granted their modification request in April 2010 after they
had paid the trial payments set up by the mortgage lender. They are current on these
mortgage payments.  5
In the fall 2009, Applicant and her husband also applied to the mortgage lender
for House B for a loan modification. They made the required trial payments; however,
the mortgage lender denied the loan modification and initiated foreclosure proceedings.
Applicant and her husband retained a real estate agent to sell House B. The real estate
agent obtained two short-sale contracts on House B. The mortgage lender rejected both
contracts, then foreclosed on the property in 2011. The mortgage lender provided
Applicant and her husband with a 1099-A tax form, which reflected that the value of the
property reclaimed was more than their debt. Applicant did not have any tax liability for
debt forgiveness as she did not owe any money on House B after foreclosure.6
Applicant and her husband incurred additional tax debt for the tax years 2007
and 2008. She and the IRS agreed on a payment plan for her unpaid taxes in 2010. She
paid the monthly payment from July 2010 through October 2012. She and her husband
resolved nearly $21,000 in tax debts by October 2012 through these payments and tax
refunds. Applicant paid two other credit card debts of $528 and $3,559 in 2010.7
Applicant advised that she is disputing the $518 debt in SOR allegation 1.d and is
part of a class action suit connected with the $7,980 debt in SOR allegation 1.b. She
has not provided documentation showing the current status of her dispute or the class
action suit.  8
Applicant has not resolved any of the debts identified in the SOR, which total
more than $81,000. She advised in her interrogatory answers that she had worked with
Items 1, 3, 5, 11.9
Item 6.10
Items 3, 5, 6.11
4
attorneys and financial advisors to resolve her debts. She attached to her SOR
response a letter from an attorney advising that she and her husband had retained the
attorney to assist them with the preparation and filing of a Chapter 13 bankruptcy
petition. Applicant and her husband plan to reorganize their debts to optimize their
budget and savings for retirement. They will have 60 months to do so under a Chapter
13 plan. As of May 2014, she had not yet filed her bankruptcy petition.9
Applicant’s tax return transcripts for the tax years 2009 through 2012 reflect an
increase in household gross income from $69,400 in 2009 to $145,687 in 2012. She did
not provide a financial statement showing her monthly net income and her monthly
expenses.10
Applicant advised that she and her husband used their retirement income to pay
their bills after losing their jobs. Their tax returns do reflect use of their retirement
savings, which were included as taxable income. Applicant and her husband exhausted
their savings and retirement funds paying expenses while unemployed.  11
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
5
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems when she and her husband
lost their jobs in 2009. The loss of income created high levels of debt. The SOR debts
have not been resolved. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
6
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems arose in 2009 when she and her husband lost their
jobs within months of each other. They immediately applied for mortgage loan
modifications on Houses A and B. Over the next year, they worked with the mortgage
lenders on their request. The mortgage lender for House A approved their loan
modification, and the mortgage lender for House B denied their request and foreclosed
on House B. They negotiated a payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
to resolve their unpaid taxes for the years 2007 and 2008. By 2012 they had resolved
their more than $21,000 in tax debt. They also paid two other loans in 2010. AG ¶ 20(b)
is partially applicable because of these actions. It is not fully applicable because
Applicant has not established that she has taken any action to resolve her SOR debts
which are more than $81,000 nor has she shown that she has taken action on her debts
in the last two years.
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable because Applicant received financial counseling
when she started the loan modification process. At this time, the SOR debts are not
under control or resolved. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the two small debts and Applicant’s
mortgages as she initiated actions to resolve these non-SOR debts. However, at this
time, the resolution of the SOR debts is unknown, and AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to
these debts.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
7
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
8
financial problems arose because of circumstances beyond her control. (See AG &
2(a)(2).) When they recognized a change in the economy starting, Applicant and her
husband decided to downsize their residence, a good decision. Their mistake was to
purchase a second house before their primary residence had been sold. When they
realized that their primary residence would not sell, they rented their smaller home. This
decision allowed them to pay their bills until 2009 when she and her husband became
unemployed within months of each other. (See AG & 2(a)(4).) She was unemployed for
more than a year. The length of her husband’s unemployment is unknown. This loss of
income created huge financial issues for them. They used their retirement savings to
keep their bills paid and applied for mortgage loan modifications. Again, they made
good decisions. They acted responsibly about their tax debt and paid two smaller bills.
They talked with professionals to get guidance on how to resolve their financial
problems. They took steps to correct their financial situation through 2012. 
Applicant provided a letter, indicating that she would be filing a Chapter 13
bankruptcy petition. A Chapter 13 bankruptcy requires a plan to pay debts. At this time,
the record does not contain any evidence showing that her petition has been filed, the
status of her bankruptcy petition, what debts are included in the petition, or a copy of
her plan to resolve her debts. Her current monthly income and expenses are unknown
as the record lacks evidence of either. From 2008 until 2012, Applicant took reasonable
actions to gain control of some of her debts. For the last two years, she does not appear
to have taken any further actions to resolve her debts. The filing of a Chapter 13
bankruptcy petition is a step in the right direction, although at this time, the record lacks
evidence showing that it has been filed, a plan approved, and payments under such a
plan have been made as allowed. Given her past actions, Applicant most likely will
comply with a payment plan. However, until she demonstrates such compliance, it is too
soon to grant her a security clearance.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f: Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
