Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-10.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXX, Xxxx Xxxxxx Xxx )       ISCR Case No. 12-04949
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 4 February 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 30 May 2014, the day Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
submitted no materials for review. DOHA assigned the case to me 30 June 2014.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR financial allegation. He is a 37-year-old security guard
pending employment by a U.S. defense contractor since December 2011. He has not
previously held a clearance.
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits (Items 6-9) substantiate, an unpaid
judgment for $20,533, obtained in March 2007 (Item 9). According to Applicant, the
judgment is for leased equipment he used during an abortive attempt to run a bakery—a
bakery that went out of business in September 2004 (Item 6). Applicant claims, without
corroboration, to have settled the debt for a single payment of $8,000 made before the
judgment was entered (Item 6). Applicant’s credit reports reflect a significant number of
delinquent charged-off and collection accounts that were subsequently resolved.
Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories (Item 6) contains a current credit
report reflecting that the judgment was scheduled to be removed from his credit report
in December 2014. Applicant’s Answer contains a more recent credit report reflecting
that the judgment has been removed from his credit report. Applicant provided no work
or character references.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that7
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
3
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has a history of financial
difficulties and this unresolved judgment.  Applicant’s financial problems date to at least4
2004, when he shuttered his bakery.
 Applicant’s credit reports and the court record clearly establish the delinquent
judgment. Although Applicant denied the SOR allegation, he acknowledged the debt
during a subject interview and claimed that he had settled the judgment for $8,000.
However, he submitted no documentation to support that claim. Further, he had the
burden to show that he had settled the debt, or otherwise successfully challenged the
debt on his credit reports, rather than having the debt just age off his credit report.
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, although the immediate causes of his
problems are unlikely to recur.  While the failure of his bakery was a circumstance5
beyond his control, Applicant has not been responsible in addressing his debt, having
failed to document his claimed resolution of the judgment.  Applicant offered no6
evidence of financial or credit counseling, and has presented no budget or plan for
addressing his remaining debt, other than having it become uncollectible by aging off
his credit report.  Under the circumstances, Applicant’s efforts cannot be considered a7
good-faith effort to address his debts.  Accordingly, I conclude Guideline F against8
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
4
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
