 
 
1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 12-04658 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. Her request for a security clearance is granted. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that cited security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In her March 14, 2014 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR 
allegations, with explanations, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
May 28, 2014. The hearing was held by video teleconference on June 11, 2014.1 I 
                                                 
1 The Directive requires that applicants receive 15 days’ notice of the hearing date. (Directive 5220.6 at  
§ E3.1.8). The hearing notice was issued 14 days before the hearing date. However, in May 2014, 
Department Counsel and Applicant had discussed hearing dates, and Applicant specifically requested 
 
 
 
2 
 
admitted six Government exhibits (GE 1-6). Department Counsel provided an additional 
document after the hearing, admitted without objection as GE 7. I also admitted into the 
record the Government exhibit list as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and a demonstrative 
exhibit of Applicant's debt status, prepared by Department Counsel, as HE II. I admitted 
five Applicant exhibits (AE A-E). I held the record open after the hearing, and Applicant 
timely submitted five additional documents, which I admitted as AE F-J. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) on June 20, 2014. The record closed on July 9, 2014. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the hearing, I granted Department Counsel’s motion to withdraw the SOR 
allegations listed at subparagraphs 1.g, 1.h, and 1.m to conform to the evidence. (Tr. 9-
10). 
 
 In addition, I requested that Department Counsel provide the complete text of 
Applicant's hand-written note on page 14 of GE 2, which was incomplete. Following the 
hearing, he submitted the complete text of the note, which I inserted into GE 2, and 
marked as pages 14a and 14b. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 36 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 1999. She married 
in 2000, and has two children, four and seven years of age. Applicant and her husband 
operated a business from 2002 to 2013. Starting in 2003, she worked part time as the 
company’s bookkeeper, but was not compensated. Between 2003 and 2009, she 
worked at times in the family business, and at times for other companies. From January 
to June 2009, she worked about 20 hours per week as a bookkeeper for a computer 
memory wholesaler. From March 2009 to August 2011, she worked full time as an 
executive assistant for a candle company. At that point, she began her current full-time 
employment with a defense contractor as an executive assistant. She began at a salary 
of $44,000, and currently earns $49,600. This is her first application for a security 
clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 22-25) 
 
In May 2002, Applicant's husband started a delicatessen and catering business. 
The business brought in about $26,000 net per year. Applicant's husband drew 
approximately $500 per week salary from the business, and his draw never increased 
beyond that amount. During the first year of operation, Applicant was employed outside 
the family business, earning about $45,000. Later, she worked in the delicatessen. It 
                                                                                                                                                            
the June 11 date, effectively receiving timely notice of the hearing date.  
 
 
3 
was located in a property they rented. The rent repeatedly rose over time, and Applicant 
and her husband decided to purchase the property. In August 2005, as advised by their 
attorney, they created a limited liability corporation, which purchased the commercial 
property, and rented it back to the business. Applicant and her husband also owned a 
condominium rental property. (GE 2; Tr. 25-28, 44, 66) 
 
When the nationwide recession hit in 2008, the family business declined. In 
2009, Applicant decided to seek other employment to help support the family, and to 
provide less costly family health insurance. Applicant's husband was not able to take a 
full salary from the business, and Applicant's salary was the primary support for the 
family. Although finances remained tight, they were able to meet their expenses and 
mortgage payments. But their business revenues continued to decline as other 
companies moved from the area. Applicant’s husband was forced to cut back store 
hours because of lack of customers. (GE 1, 2, 5; Tr. 28-30) 
 
 Applicant's mother was diagnosed with cancer, and Applicant became her 
primary caregiver. Around 2010, Applicant lost some time at work caring for her mother 
and was not paid for it. She was pregnant with her second child and out of work on 
maternity leave. Later, she was caring for the new infant and her older child. After her 
mother passed away in August 2010, Applicant inherited approximately $60,000. 
Applicant's husband was not taking income from their business at the time and 
Applicant used the funds, in part, to pay business and personal expenses, as well as 
approximately $9,000 in sales taxes. (GE 2; Tr. 45-46, 54-57) 
 
 Despite these difficulties, Applicant was able to maintain her credit between 2008 
and 2012. Her 2011 credit bureau report shows all accounts in good standing, but for 
one small account in collection status. However, by summer 2012, Applicant and her 
husband were unable to meet the mortgage payments on the commercial property. She 
notified the mortgage company of their difficulties. In August 2012, they started making 
partial mortgage payments. The lender initiated foreclosure proceedings in about late 
2012. In October 2012, Applicant and her husband contacted an attorney for financial 
advice. The attorney advised them to file for bankruptcy protection because, given the 
real estate market decline, the sale of the commercial property would not yield sufficient 
proceeds to resolve their mortgage debts. Applicant provided a copy of a letter her 
attorney sent to her employer, explaining that he had advised her to stop making bill 
payments because of her intended bankruptcy filing. (GE 2 at 1, 20; Tr. 28-31, 42-43, 
46) Applicant stated in her Answer, 
 
[W]e are going to have to file personal bankruptcy since there will not be 
anything left to pay [the creditors]. This was against everything I believe in 
and have worked for in my life, but our business unfortunately could not 
endure these financial burdens. (GE 2 at 1) 
 
 In January 2013, they placed the commercial property on the market seeking a 
short sale. They received offers of $80,000, $90,000, and $120,000. They accepted the 
 
 
4 
 
highest offer, but the buyer reneged. They continued to pay their debts until about 
spring 2013. (GE 2 at 1; Tr. 28-31, 42-43, 46) 
 
 In March 2013, Applicant and her husband closed their business. Applicant's 
husband was unemployed for two months. After a short full-time job of four months, he 
was unemployed from September 2013 to June 2014. On March 13, 2014, Applicant 
and her husband filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. Their debts were successfully 
discharged on July 3, 2014. (AE J; Tr. 58, 64)  
 
Applicant noted in her Answer to the SOR: 
 
These credit cards and loan payments were manageable had our 
business kept generating revenue above our expenses; however, that 
didn’t happen. We had to use inherited money from my mother’s estate to 
pay commercial expenses instead of reducing our personal debt. This was 
in the hopes that the economy would turn around and bring people back 
out to spend money at local retailers. That unfortunately did not happen 
during this time and we suffered the loss of our business of almost eleven 
years, as well as sacrificed our personal credit and money.  
 
Applicant and her husband live in a house owned by her father-in-law. They do 
not pay rent, but pay $934 monthly for property taxes. Applicant's current gross annual 
salary is $49,600. Her husband began a new position as a chef in June 2014, and his 
annual gross salary is $40,000. As of late 2013, they were receiving $1,500 per month 
in rental income. (GE 2 at 23) She also provided their family budget showing net 
monthly income of $4,916, which includes her husband’s net salary, but not the income 
from their rental property. With monthly expenses of $3,312, Applicant currently has a 
net monthly remainder of $1,604. Applicant and her husband do not have any open 
credit card accounts, and use cash to pay for expenses. They have not been late on 
any home or car payments in 2014. As of March 2014, they had approximately $45,000 
in retirement accounts. Applicant and her husband each completed a financial 
management course in June 2014 as part of the bankruptcy process. (GE 2; AE F, G, 
H; Tr. 47-53) 
 
The SOR debts appear in four credit reports dated 2011 through 2014. (GE 3-6) 
The status of Applicant's SOR debts follows. 
 
PROPERTY-RELATED DEBTS:  
 
1.b – Condominium fee, $880. Included in bankruptcy petition. Applicant owed an 
annual condominium association fee in 2012 for her rental property. When she was 
informed the debt was $2,180, she thought the association had made an error. After 
contacting the creditor, she learned that it had filed two claims in two different county 
courts. However, in 2013, her attorney advised her not to pay the debt because of her 
 
 
5 
pending bankruptcy filing. The current debt of $2,200 is discharged. (GE 4, 6; AE D, I; 
Tr. 40-42) 
 
1.k, 1.l – Line of credit loans. Included in bankruptcy petition. In 2005 or 2006, 
Applicant opened a line of credit for business equipment. In 2013, it was delinquent, 
with a balance of $20,135 (allegation 1.k). She also obtained a home equity loan of 
$73,405 in 2002 (allegation 1.l). It was 120 days delinquent as of August 2013. Both 
loans are discharged in her bankruptcy petition. (GE 2-6; AE D) 
 
1.n – Property taxes, $5,908. Unresolved. This debt for property taxes on Applicant's 
condominium is not included in her bankruptcy petition. The property is collateral for her 
commercial property loan. Applicant is unsure how this property will be handled when 
the commercial property is foreclosed. She plans to consult with her attorney about how 
to resolve it. (Tr. 43-44, 48) 
 
1.o – Mortgage, $242,697. Included in bankruptcy petition. In February 2013, the 
lender prevailed in a judgment against Applicant and her husband for the delinquency 
related to the commercial property mortgage. Applicant’s pay was garnished 
approximately $520 per month. The lender ultimately initiated foreclosure proceedings 
on the property. The primary mortgage loan on Applicant's commercial property is listed 
at $243,000 in her bankruptcy petition, which describes the property as being, in March 
2014, “in the late stages of foreclosure.” (GE 2 at 3; AE D) 
 
CREDIT CARD ACCOUNTS: 
 
1.e, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j – totaling $7,948. Included in bankruptcy petition. Applicant and 
her husband used credit cards to pay business and family expenses. When finances 
were tight, she paid minimum amounts on the balances. She was able to bring some 
cards to a current status, but others became delinquent. She stopped paying on these 
balances, on her attorney’s advice. All were discharged through her bankruptcy. 
Applicant and her husband no longer use credit cards. (GE 2, 3, 4, 6; AE D) 
 
INCOME TAX: 
 
1.a – Internal Revenue Service, $3,691. Paid. Although Applicant did not have 
sufficient documentation to file a complete income tax return for tax year 2011, her 
accountant timely filed the return, which indicated Applicant owed $2,799. The amended 
return showed Applicant’s tax liability was reduced by $2,693. With about $40 in interest 
and penalties, Applicant owed an adjusted tax of $145.22. She provided evidence that 
the tax is paid. (Attachment to Answer at pages 4-8; GE 2; Tr. 31-35, 39-40) 
 
MISCELLANEOUS: 
 
1.c – Medical debt - Unresolved; 1.d, Gym - included in bankruptcy petition. The 
SOR alleges a medical debt of $139 (1.c), and a gym membership debt of $249 (1.d). 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant testified that the debts are included in the bankruptcy petition. The gym debt is 
included in Applicant's bankruptcy petition. However, no entry listed in the petition 
appears to relate to the medical debt. However, even if the debt is not included, the 
small balance of $139 is not security-significant. (GE 2, 4; AE D, I; Tr. 44) 
 
 In Applicant’s performance evaluations of 2012 and 2013, her supervisor of the 
past two years noted that she is committed, thorough, timely, and engages in due 
diligence on her projects. She is praised by project administrators as a diplomatic 
communicator and a valuable member of the team. Applicant's current program 
manager is a retired Marine Corps major. He noted that Applicant was candid about her 
business failure. He also stated that she has been promoted to provisioning analyst, 
based on her outstanding performance. Another program manager opined that 
Applicant has demonstrated high moral values and personal ethics in her work. 
Applicant's mentor described her as intelligent and dedicated, with a reputation for 
excellent work. A project lead at her current company described Applicant as hard-
working and honest, with a strong work ethic. The president of a retail business where 
Applicant worked stated Applicant is trustworthy, because he trusted her to handle the 
company’s financial transactions in his absence. He stated that during the financial 
crisis, Applicant was the primary support for her family. The mayor of Applicant's 
township has known her for more than 10 years. He described her as “a great asset to 
our community” who is trustworthy and displays sound judgment. (AE A-C) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be an impartial, commonsense 
determination based on examination of available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
 
 A security clearance decision is issued only to resolve the question of whether it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
                                                 
2  Directive. 6.3. 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
7 
to deny or revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to the 
Applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.4 A 
person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or her own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . .  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began when the business she and her husband 
operated was negatively affected by the nationwide recession in 2008. Her debts 
started becoming delinquent in about 2012. The record contains no evidence of debts 
related to gambling, alcohol or drug abuse, or other negative conduct. The following 
disqualifying conditions apply under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 I have also considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
                                                 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant's delinquencies resulted from a combination of her financial 
dependence on a family-owned business, and a nationwide recession that negatively 
affected its earnings. Applicant has closed the business. Both she and her husband 
have full-time jobs. It is unlikely they will be in a similar situation in the future. Her 
current judgment and trustworthiness are not in question. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on delinquencies that result from events that an applicant 
could not control. Here, several events affected Applicant’s ability to maintain financial 
solvency. Her business successfully supported the family for several years. But it 
started to decline significantly as a result of the recession that began in 2008. Because 
of the nationwide real estate crisis, her property value declined steeply, and her 
mortgage loan was underwater. In 2010, Applicant became the primary caregiver when 
her mother had cancer. At the same time, she was caring for two young children, and 
working full-time outside the home. Also in 2010, her husband could not afford to take 
a draw from the delicatessen business. They finally had to close the business in 2012. 
Applicant's husband was out of work for nine months.  
 
 Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. She took steps to respond 
to the decline in income from the delicatessen. In 2009, she returned to full-time work 
outside the family business. She became the family’s main financial support. Her 
outside job provided steady income. It also allowed Applicant to lower the family’s 
previous high health insurance costs. These steps, and Applicant's four years of efforts 
to keep her debts under control during the recession and the decline of her family 
business from 2008 to 2012, demonstrates her good-faith efforts to meet her financial 
obligations. When she was no longer able to pay as required, she informed her lender 
she would only be able to make partial payments. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d)6 apply.  
                                                 
6 Applicant's bankruptcy discharge does not fall under AG ¶ 20(d), as the Appeal Board has held that 
“[a]n applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such 
as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good faith mitigating condition].” It more accurately 
falls under AG ¶ 20(c), showing that the financial problems are either resolved or under control. 
 
 
 
9 
 Applicant sought financial guidance and counseling about how to handle the 
debts from her attorney. Although her attorney advised her to stop paying her debts 
because of the bankruptcy petition she would be filing, she did not want to seek 
bankruptcy protection and she continued to pay them until spring 2014. However, she 
then followed her attorney’s advice and filed a Chapter 7 petition. Applicant's debts are 
under control, as the bulk of her debts were discharged in July 2014. Although 
Applicant has two debts totaling approximately $6,000 that are not included in her 
bankruptcy petition, the Appeal Board has held that an applicant is not required to have 
paid every debt.7 Moreover, Applicant and her husband are now both employed, and 
they have a substantial monthly remainder, not including rental income. Applicant has 
had a viable plan to use a legitimate means to resolve her debts, and she has acted on 
it. Applicant has brought her financial situation under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant is an intelligent, hardworking, and responsible woman. She was open 
and candid throughout the investigation, and credible in her testimony. She and her 
husband opened a business in 2002. Initially, it was successful and she had solid 
credit. However, starting in 2008, a succession of events caused financial difficulties, 
especially the 2008 recession that produced a steady decline in Applicant's business. 
She showed strength of character by caring for her mother during her mother’s final 
illness, at the same time working full time, and caring for two small children. Applicant 
                                                 
7 See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). “[A]n Applicant is not required to be 
debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously.” An applicant must 
act responsibly, develop a reasonable plan, and show action to effectuate the plan.  
 
 
10 
 
used an inheritance and her salary to supplement the declining delicatessen revenue 
and keep her accounts in good standing for several years. However, by 2012, she was 
no longer able to keep up and accounts became delinquent. After she and her husband 
closed the business, he was unemployed for nine months and Applicant continued to 
be the primary support for her family.  
 
 Applicant did not ignore her creditors. She notified her lender, and started 
making partial mortgage payments. The lender eventually initiated foreclosure 
proceedings. Applicant reluctantly filed a chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. It was 
discharged in 2014, and Applicant is no longer liable for the debts. Given her 
demonstrated maturity, stability, and substantial monthly remainder, I conclude such a 
situation will not recur. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude she has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g, 1.h  WITHDRAWN 
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.l  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.m   WITHDRAWN 
  Subparagraphs 1.n – 1.o  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
