 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06782 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s security violations demonstrated negligence and lack of judgment. 
Notwithstanding, he changed his behavior and received no additional security violations 
from November 2008 to June 2011. The most recent security violation was over five 
years ago. As such, it is temporally remote. Applicant expressed remorse and took 
responsibility for his actions. He has demonstrated a renewed, positive attitude toward 
the discharge of security responsibilities. Considering his service, credible contrition, 
and his current attitude toward the discharge of his security responsibilities, I find 
Applicant’s past security violations are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
March 6, 2012. On February 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline K 
(handling protected information) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 10, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice for a video teleconference 
(VTC) hearing on June 19, 2014, convening a hearing for July 2, 2014. The 
Government requested a continuance that same day, which I granted. (Appellate Exhibit 
1) The hearing was convened on July 30, 2014. At the hearing, the Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted no exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR (Answer), Applicant admitted the factual allegations 
under SOR ¶ 1.a, with comments. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant 
failed to admit or deny SOR ¶ 2.b. At his hearing, he admitted the factual allegations in 
SOR ¶ 2.b. The personal conduct factual allegations in SOR ¶ 2.b are identical to those 
alleged under the handling protected information guideline in SOR ¶ 1.a. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a government contractor. He enlisted in 
the U.S. Marine Corps in December 1974, and served six years. He was commissioned 
as a Marine Corps second lieutenant in June 1980, and continually served on active 
duty until he was honorably retired with the rank of lieutenant colonel in March 2005. 
Applicant held sensitive leadership and command positions as a Marine Corps officer. 
He possessed a top secret security clearance during most of his service. There is no 
evidence to show that he was involved in any security violations while serving as a 
Marine. 
 
Applicant married his wife in January 1983, and they have three sons: a 29-year-
old son who is currently serving as a captain in Marine Corps, a 27-year-old son, and a 
24-year-old son who is attending college and living at home. Applicant received his 
bachelor’s degree in June 1980, and was awarded master’s degrees in June 1996, and 
June 1999. 
 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
After his retirement, Applicant was hired abroad by a U.S. government agency 
(Agency) as a civilian employee. He worked for the Agency from 2004 to June 2011. He 
resigned his position and returned to the United States because one of his sons was 
having medical problems and needed his help.  
 
Upon his hiring, Applicant’s access to classified information was continued by the 
Agency, and he possessed a security clearance from 2004 until he resigned in June 
2011. Between October 2004 and November 2008, Applicant received 19 security 
infractions: two in 2004, three in 2005 (two at NATO secret level), two in 2006, five in 
2007 (one at NATO secret level), seven in 2008 (two at NATO secret level). Of these 
infractions, 11 involved Applicant leaving unclassified computer discs unsecured in his 
office, and 6 violations involved leaving NATO confidential or secret classified 
documents unsecured overnight in his office.  
 
In May 2007, security personnel counseled Applicant about his security 
infractions and warned him that his continued violations would impact his ability to hold 
his position. In the summer of 2008, security personnel again counseled Applicant about 
his security violations. He was warned in writing that his security clearance was at risk 
because of his continued security violations. After receipt of this written warning, 
Applicant was involved in three security infractions.  
 
Following his receipt of the 2008 security written warning, Applicant changed his 
behavior and his office procedures to avoid future security violations. He moved two 
secured containers from his office into his secretary’s office. He established a policy 
requiring all office personnel to check each other’s area for possible security infractions 
before leaving the office. Additionally, he returned all computer disks assigned to him to 
the security office. After the implementation of these office procedures, Applicant 
received no additional security violations from November 2008 to June 2011.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant’s testimony was candid and forthcoming. He 
acknowledged his 19 security violations, and that he was counseled twice by security 
personnel concerning his security infractions. Applicant explained that he had a difficult 
time transitioning from his military position to a civilian work environment. In his civilian 
position, he was an executive officer and supervised a secretary and three or four 
civilian employees. He had difficulty remembering the particulars of all of the security 
violations, but believed that some of them involved his office personnel. Nevertheless, 
he acknowledged that because he was in charge of the office, he was ultimately 
responsible for the security violations and took responsibility for them. After each of the 
infractions, he was required to visit the security office and sign a document 
acknowledging the security infractions. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his past security violations and admitted that he 
had been negligent. He believes they occurred because he was absent-minded and 
frustrated with the inconsistency of the security rules concerning unclassified material. 
He is fully aware of the concerns raised by his security violations. He repeatedly stated 
that he should have been more careful following security procedures. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant highlighted his 31 years of service in the Marine Corps without any 
security violations. He held sensitive leadership and command positions as a Marine 
Corps officer, and possessed a top secret security clearance during most of his service. 
Applicant believes that his service record shows that he is a loyal American, and that he 
is not a security risk. Applicant noted that he took steps to remedy his security 
violations.  
 
Applicant’s March 2012 SCA (Section 13(A) - Received Discipline or Warning) 
required him to disclose whether in the last seven years he received a written warning, 
was officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the work place, 
such as a violation of a security policy. Applicant answered “No,” and failed to disclose 
that he was verbally counseled in 2007, and that he received a written warning in 2008 
about his numerous security violations.  
 
Applicant readily admitted that his answer to Section 13(A) was wrong. He 
credibly testified that he did not intend to deceive or withhold relevant information from 
the Government. He mistakenly focused on the disciplinary part of the question asking 
whether he had been reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct, and failed 
to read the whole question. Because of his experience in the service and with the 
security clearance process, Applicant knew that the Government would have access to 
his entire security record and that the infractions were thoroughly documented. I note 
that Applicant thoroughly discussed his security violations and security warnings during 
interviews with government investigators in October 2009 (GE 6) and November 2010 
(GE 7). 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
Applicant received 19 security violations from about October 2004 to about 
November 2008. Of these infractions, 11 involved Applicant leaving unclassified 
computer discs unsecured in his office, and 6 violations involved leaving NATO 
confidential or secret classified documents unsecured overnight in his office. In May 
2007 (verbally) and in the summer of 2008 (in writing), security personnel counseled 
Applicant about his numerous security infractions and warned him that his continued 
violations would impact his ability to hold his position and a security clearance. After 
receipt of this 2008 security written warning, Applicant was involved in three security 
infractions.  
 
 Such actions triggered disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 34 that raised a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
 
6 
 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
AG ¶ 35 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 
35(a) and (b) apply and mitigate the security concerns in this case. The most recent 
security violation was over five years ago. As such, it is temporally remote. After 
Applicant received his 2008 written warning, he changed his behavior and his office’s 
operating procedures to avoid additional security violations. Following the 
implementation of these new office operating procedures, from November 2008 to his 
resignation date in June 2011, Applicant received no additional security violations. 
 
  Applicant expressed remorse for his past security violations, admitted that he 
was negligent, and took responsibility for his actions. He is fully aware of the serious 
concerns raised by his security violations. Applicant’s demeanor while testifying and his 
credible testimony demonstrate a renewed, positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities.  
 
Applicant served 36 years on active duty in the Marine Corps. He was honorably 
retired with the rank of lieutenant colonel in March 2005. During his service, Applicant 
held sensitive leadership and command positions as a Marine Corps officer and 
possessed a top secret security clearance during most of his service. There is no 
evidence to show that he was involved in any security violations while in the service. 
Considering his service, credible contrition, and his renewed positive attitude toward the 
discharge of his security responsibilities, I find Applicant’s past security violations are 
unlikely to recur and they do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to disclose in his 2012 SCA the security verbal and written 
warnings he received, if deliberate, would raise security concerns under the personal 
conduct guideline. Such behavior would trigger the applicability of personal conduct 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.”  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that his omission was not intentional 
or made with the intent to mislead the Government. Because of his experience in the 
service and with the security clearance process, Applicant knew that the Government 
would have access to his entire security record and that all his security infractions were 
documented in his record. Moreover, Applicant thoroughly and candidly discussed his 
security violations and security counseling during interviews with government 
investigators in October 2009 and November 2010. There was no reason for him to 
deliberately omit in his 2012 SCA anything concerning his past security violations or that 
he received a written security warning in 2008. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c))  
 
Applicant, 61, honorably served 36 years in the Marine Corps while possessing a 
security clearance without any security violations. He demonstrated lack of judgment by 
committing 19 security violations from October 2004 to November 2008. 
 
Notwithstanding, he changed his behavior and his office’s operating procedures 
and received no additional security violations from November 2008 to June 2011. The 
most recent security violation was close to six years ago. As such, it is temporally 
remote. Applicant expressed remorse for his past security violations and took 
responsibility for his actions. He is fully aware of the serious concerns raised by his 
security violations. Applicant demonstrated a renewed, positive attitude toward the 
discharge of security responsibilities.  
 
Considering Applicant’s service, credible contrition, and his renewed positive 
attitude toward the discharge of his security responsibilities, I find his past security 
 
8 
 
 
violations are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
