KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant was placed on reasonable notice of her right to submit matters in response to
the File of Relevant Material.  Hearing Office decisions are not binding on other Hearing Office
Judges or on the Appeal Board.  Adverse decision affirmed.   
CASE NO: 12-04508.a1
DATE: 08/21/2014
DATE: August 21, 2014
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04508
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 21, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On June 10, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Rita C. O’Brien denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1The five debts that the Judge resolved against Applicant totaled nearly $35,000.  
2See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03656 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 19, 2011).  
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for the same Defense contractor since 1988.  She has held a top secret
clearance since that time.  Applicant’s SOR lists six delinquent debts, one for medical treatment and
the others for credit cards.  She did not provide evidence as to why she had multiple credit card
accounts, saying only “Everyone makes mistakes and hardships do happen.”  Decision at 2.
Applicant entered into an agreement with a debt-resolution agency.  The agency stipulated that her
debts must be at least six months delinquent before they would negotiate with creditors.  She stated
that, before joining this program, her credit cards were being paid on time.”  Id.  Between 2007 and
2010, the agency settled ten accounts, and Applicant settled three others on her own.  She stated that
her financial situation has improved and that many of her credit card accounts will drop from her
credit reports.  The Judge listed each SOR debt, concluding that Applicant had demonstrated that
one of them was in the process of being resolved through a payment plan.  For the remainder,
however, the Judge found that Applicant had failed to substantiate her claims of debt resolution.1
The Judge’s Analysis
As noted above, the Judge resolved one debt in Applicant’s favor.  For the remainder, she
concluded that they were ongoing and unpaid.  Though noting Applicant’s debt resolution program,
she stated that the debts settled through that program were not the same ones listed in the SOR.
Noting Applicant’s belief that a debt that is beyond the statute of limitations has been resolved, the
Judge pointed to the long-standing principle that mere non-collectability of a debt does not
demonstrate that the debt has been settled.2  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that
Applicant has held a clearance for many years, which should have put her on notice that delinquent
debts can raise security concerns.
Discussion
Applicant notes that she was not represented by counsel when she responded to the File of
Relevant Material (FORM) and, therefore, was not aware that she could have provided character
references, performance evaluations, etc.  However, the FORM advised Applicant that she could
provide a documentary response setting forth matters in rebuttal, extenuation, and/or mitigation.
Moreover, DOHA mailed the FORM to Applicant accompanied by a letter advising that she could
hire counsel and that she could submit “any material you wish the Administrative Judge to consider
. . .”  Applicant also received a copy of the Directive, which includes her rights to counsel and to
3
submit matters in response to the FORM.  Applicant was placed on reasonable notice of her rights.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-11221 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2013).  She was not denied the due
process afforded by the Directive. 
Applicant challenges the Judge’s application of the mitigating conditions and the whole-
person factors, focusing particularly on her payment of delinquent debts, including those not alleged
in the SOR.  The Judge discussed these issues at length in her analysis, and Applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge is not sufficient to demonstrate that she erred.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
12-03074 at 3 (App. Bd. May 16, 2014).    
Applicant has submitted Hearing Office cases in support of her appeal arguments.  We give
them due consideration as persuasive authority.  However, Hearing Office cases are not binding on
other Hearing Office Judge’s or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00464 at 3 (App.
Bd. Feb. 20, 2014).  The Judge’s conclusions about the paucity of evidence corroborating
Applicant’s claims of debt resolution are consistent with the record that was before her.  The Judge
examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision
is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
4
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
