KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Board does not share Applicant’s interpretation of Guideline E that there must be
several instances of misconduct.  Rather, the Guideline only requires that the misconduct fall
under several adjudicative areas.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 13-01281.a1
DATE: 08/04/2014
DATE: August 4, 2014
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-01281
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Jeffrey S. Gard, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 30, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 29, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
the case raised security concerns under Guideline E and whether the Judge erred by failing to apply
the Guideline E mitigating conditions (MC).  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline H are
not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant began using drugs recreationally in high school.  He used nitrous oxide three times
and LSD twice.  In college he occasionally used marijuana.  He used hallucinogenic mushrooms
twice.  While in graduate school he began working for a Federal contractor.  In completing his first
security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed his drug use.  He continued to use drugs
for at least two years after submitting his SCA.  He knew that this use violated his employer’s drug
policy.  He smoked marijuana with varying degrees of frequency between 2001 and 2003.  He also
used mushrooms once in 2003.  He received a top secret clearance in 2004.  He abstained from drug
use from 2004 until 2009.
In 2009, Applicant’s mother was diagnosed with cancer.  She died the following year.   Upon
learning of his mother’s illness, Applicant postponed moving to another state, in order remain with
his mother.  In 2009 and 2010, Applicant used marijuana five times.  He stated that he did so in
order to relieve stress and to “maximize some fun in [his] life.”  Decision at 2.  Each time he used
marijuana he contemplated the wrongfulness of his action but went ahead with the use anyway.  In
doing so, Applicant was attempting to self medicate.  He realized that his conduct was not
acceptable, so he entered grief counseling.  He did not disclose his drug use to the counselor.  When
Applicant told his girlfriend about his conduct, she did not approve of it.  
In 2010, he completed another SCA.  He disclosed his drug use, but, as he had with his use
in previous years, he did not disclose it to his employer.  At the time, his career was in transition and
he believed that reporting his drug use would be harmful to his career.
In 2012, Applicant moved across country to be with his girlfriend.  He no longer associates
with people who use drugs.  At his girlfriend’s recommendation, Applicant entered counseling for
stress management.  He believes that his counseling has enabled him to deal with his emotions in
a constructive manner.  Applicant’s therapist provided a letter in which she lauded his progress.
  
Applicant obtained a drug evaluation from an addictions counselor, who stated that he did
not meet the criteria for substance abuse or dependence.  Although the counselor stated that
Applicant did not need any more drug therapy, she recommended further counseling in stress
management.
In 2012, Applicant began working for his current employer.  Prior to the hearing, he
disclosed his drug use to his current supervisor, but he did not disclose his use while holding a
clearance.
The Judge’s Analysis
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 16(c): “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.”  
Applicant’s SOR alleged the same misconduct under both Guidelines.  The Judge cleared
Applicant under Guideline H, stating that his disclosures of his drug use to various persons means
that he is not likely to be subject to coercion or blackmail.  She also cited to the passage of time
since Applicant’s last use of drugs as well as to his receipt of counseling and to his strong support
system.  The Judge also concluded that Applicant’s use of drugs, under the facts of this case, raised
concerns under Guideline E, in specific Disqualifying Condition (DC) 16(c).1  She stated that
Applicant’s use of drugs while holding a clearance supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
She also stated that Applicant’s failure to disclose his drug use to his former employer was another
factor contributing to her whole-person assessment.
The Judge acknowledged that Applicant’s more recent drug use was influenced by anxiety
over his mother’s illness, as well as by the malaise he felt in the transition from student to working
professional.  However, she stated that he was an educated professional who had better resources
at his disposal to address his problems than the use of illegal drugs.  She stated that his conduct
cannot be viewed as minor, insofar as he repeatedly engaged in actions that were illegal as well as
in violation both of his employer’s drug policy and his responsibilities as someone who holds a
clearance.  She stated that his lack of full disclosure to his employer evidenced a choice to protect
himself and his reputation over his duty to report security-significant information.  She stated that
Applicant’s drug use and its attendant circumstances raised doubts about his ability willingly to self-
report significant information pertinent to his clearance.  She concluded that none of the mitigating
conditions applied.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s application of DC 16(c), contending that his case does not
show questionable judgment and other such characteristics inconsistent with holding a clearance.
He also argues that he does not meet the requirement that “there must be several instances of adverse
conduct and they must span several adjudicative areas.”  We construe this argument to mean that
the record evidence was not sufficient to raise security concerns under Guideline E.
We note first of all that the Government is required to produce evidence only regarding
allegations that have been controverted.  In those cases, the Government’s burden is to produce
substantial evidence, which is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive
¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 09-06218 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Sep. 6, 2011).  In the case before us,
however, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR.  Because the allegations were not
controverted, the Government bore no burden of production.  Nevertheless, the Government
presented evidence of Applicant’s security-significant conduct, including his answers to the SCA
and his answers to DOHA interrogatories.  These documents are sufficient to constitute substantial
2“[Judge]: Now, when you were using drugs between 2001 and 2003, why didn’t you self-report? . . .
[Applicant]: . . . Because I realized that what I was doing would probably be detrimental to my career.”  Tr. at 48-49.
evidence of the facts underlying the allegations in the SOR, even without reference to Applicant’s
SOR admissions.  
The Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct under any SOR
allegation and an applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jun. 26, 2012).  We do not find Applicant’s contentions on appeal sufficient to rebut this
presumption.  He relies in large measure upon a rather technical argument that the various criteria
described in DC 16(c) have not been met.  However, an SOR is an administrative pleading and is
not to be held to the same standards one might apply to a criminal indictment.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 04-08806 at 3 (App. Bd. May 8, 2007).  Furthermore, the DCs listed under any of the Guidelines
are not exclusive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622 at 4 (App. Bd Jul. 2, 2012).  To the contrary,
they are illustrative in nature, and, even when none of the DC s under a particular Guideline can be
applied with literal preciseness, it is not improper for a Judge to conclude that an applicant’s conduct
sets forth concerns under that Guideline. 
The same conduct can be alleged under different Guidelines and weighed differently as well.
 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07472 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011).   In this case, the Judge’s
favorable conclusion under Guideline H rested on evidence that the drug use was attenuated by time
and that Applicant had matured and was unlikely to return to such use.  Under Guideline E,
however, the Judge focused upon evidence that Applicant’s drug use suggested a cavalier attitude
toward the policies of his employer, raising a concern that he might be equally heedless of the
Government’s rules for the protection of classified information.  She also cited to evidence that
impugned Applicant’s willingness to report security significant conduct, which a reasonable person
could conclude raised questions about his candor and reliability, qualities explicitly addressed by
Guideline E.  These questions go beyond concerns about drug use as such but reasonably encompass
the possibility that Applicant might fail to disclose other circumstances of security significance or
otherwise place his own personal interests over Government’s need to protect classified
information.2  We find no error in the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s conduct raised concerns
under Guideline E and that DC 16(c) captured the essence of those concerns.  Furthermore, we do
not share Applicant’s interpretation of the Guideline that there must be several instances of
misconduct.  The Guideline only requires that the misconduct fall under several adjudicative areas.
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider any of the Guideline E MCs.  It is true
that the Judge did not list or explicitly discuss any of them.  However, her Analysis examined in
some detail evidence that supported her overall conclusion that none of the MC s were entitled to
favorable application.  The Judge did not err in the manner in which she analyzed Applicant’s
circumstances.  To hold otherwise would elevate form over substance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-
0104 at 8-10 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2001).  Moreover, her reliance upon evidence that Applicant failed
to inform his employer of his security-significant conduct and her conclusion that his infractions
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 17(a): “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the . . . concealment
before being confronted with the facts[.]” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 17(c): “the offense is . . .  minor . . . and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s reliability, untrustworthiness, or good judgment[.]” 
were not minor relate to matters that are addressed in two of the MCs.3  After considering her
Decision as a whole, we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s mitigation analysis.
Applicant’s citations to various pieces of favorable evidence are not sufficient to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
11-13984 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2014).  An ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence is not sufficient to demonstrate that a Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-00703 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 27,
2014). The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
