KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Because Applicant had admitted the allegations in the SOR, the Government had no
burden of production.  The Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proved conduct and
an applicant’s security worthiness.  An adverse decision does not necessarily mean that the
applicant will engage in criminal conduct.  Rather, it is an examination of circumstances that
raise concerns about the applicant’s judgment and reliability.  Applicant failed to rebut the
presumption that the Judge was unbiased.  Applicant failed to make a prima facie showing that
he had submitted evidence that did not make it into the record.  Applicant failed to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO: 13-00987.a1
DATE: 08/14/2014
DATE: August 14, 2014
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-00987
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 24, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On June 12, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
1While this case was pending before us, Applicant submitted an additional letter that we construe as a request
to expedite the decision in his case.  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
2
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against him;
whether Applicant was denied due process; whether the Judge erred in concluding that Applicant’s
circumstances raised security concerns; whether the Judge erred in his application of the pertinent
mitigating conditions; whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous; and whether the
Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military, during which time he received several awards and
citations.  After his discharge, he received an associate’s degree.  He has completed the requirements
for a bachelor’s degree, but he has not received his diploma because he has not paid his final
semester’s tuition.  While attending school, he worked as a bartender.  He received a security
clearance in 1999 and again in 2011.  His disciplinary record is clean.
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, for credit cards, student loans, a repossessed
automobile, etc.  He has attributed his problems to a dramatic diminution in pay while he was
attending school, the economic downturn of recent years, the poor housing market, etc.  He filed a
federal consolidation loan and promissory note to consolidate his student loans.  He has hired a law
firm to assist him in resolving his problems.  He advised that he had used all of his savings and
retirement accounts to finance his education and his living expenses.  He stated that he intended to
establish payment plans as soon as an anticipated overseas assignment comes to pass.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for his academic attainments, his military service, and
his professionalism.  He has received certificates of training in such areas as diplomatic security,
anti-terrorist driving, and “blue print” reading.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cleared Applicant of more than half of the allegations in the SOR.  However, for
the remainder of the allegations, involving more than $33,000 in delinquent debt, the Judge found
that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of persuasion.  He stated that Applicant’s decision to
take on substantial student loan debt during an economic downturn was due to his own choice rather
than something beyond his control.2  He further stated that Applicant had not corroborated claims
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(d): “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts[.]”
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(c): “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”
5See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 3 (App. Bd. May 31, 2011): An applicant must “act responsibly given
his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by ‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions
which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”  
6Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts[.]” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(c):
“a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]”
3
of debt resolution.3  The Judge found no evidence of financial counseling, insofar as the law firm
Applicant had hired merely provided advice on how to read a credit report.4  He also concluded that
Applicant had not demonstrated a plan to resolve his debts, accompanied by purposeful action to
implement the plan.5  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to the favorable evidence
Applicant submitted regarding his military service, his professionalism, and his academic
qualifications.  The Judge also noted that Applicant has no history of criminal infractions or
problems with drugs or alcohol.  The Judge cited to evidence that Applicant had received
forgiveness of a home equity loan, although this debt was not alleged in the SOR.  However, the
Judge stated that there is a paucity of evidence substantiating resolution of the debts forming the
basis of the adverse decision.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that his circumstances raised security
concerns 19(a) and (c).6  He cites to his efforts at debt resolution in support of his argument.
Whenever an applicant denies an allegation in an SOR, the Government has the burden of producing
substantial evidence of the facts supporting the allegation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06925 at
4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2013).  
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR.  Therefore, the Government bore no
burden of production.  Nevertheless, the Government presented evidence in the form of credit
reports, which are often sufficient in and of themselves to constitute substantial evidence of
Guideline F concerns.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-12204 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 2013).  The
Government also presented Applicant’s SCA, which contained significant information about his
debts problems, his response to the SOR, and his response to the File of Relevant Material.  These
documents, considered in their totality, constitute substantial evidence in support of the allegations.
Moreover, the Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct under any of the
Guidelines and an applicant’s security worthiness.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jun. 26, 2012).  Applicant’s argument on appeal is not sufficient to rebut the presumption of
nexus.  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s circumstances raised
security concerns.
7Applicant contends that he was not advised about 18 U.S.C. § 1001, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.18.
However, this paragraph refers to a hearing, not to a decision on the record.  Moreover, the Judge did not find that
Applicant intentionally provided false information.  We find no merit in Applicant’s argument. 
4
Applicant points to the Judge’s finding that his criminal record is clean.  He argues that he
will not commit crimes or otherwise engage in dishonest behavior and, therefore, should have a
clearance.  We note, first of all, that a clearance adjudication is not about an applicant’s loyalty.
Directive, Enclosure 1, SECTION 7.  Moreover, an adverse clearance decision is not necessarily a
determination that the applicant will engage in criminal conduct.  Rather, it entails an examination
of any circumstances, in the case of Guideline F financial ones, that raise concerns over the
applicant’s judgment and reliability.  Poor judgment is cited by the Directive as a factor that can
raise questions about the applicant’s ability to protect classified information.  Directive, Enclosure
2 ¶ 18.  This is the context in which the Judge analyzed Applicant’s security concerns.  He did not
conclude that Applicant was likely to commit crimes but, rather, that Applicant’s failure responsibly
to address his debts raises a reasonable concern that he may be lacking in those traits essential to the
protection of national secrets.  We find no error in the Judge’s analysis.
Applicant contends that the Judge was biased against him.  However, his argument is not
sufficient to meet his “heavy burden of persuasion” on this issue.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-
01306 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2009).  There is nothing in the record that would persuade a
reasonable person that the Judge lacked the requisite impartiality.  Applicant has cited to a Hearing
Office case that, he argues, supports his effort to get a clearance.  Hearing Office cases are binding
neither on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00464
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2014).  We give this case due consideration.  However, it is not sufficient
to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Applicant has submitted evidence not contained in the record,
which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant argues that he submitted evidence that did not make it into the record, and he
claims that the Judge acknowledged as much.  Applicant has not provided any corroboration for this
assertion, and the record does not support it.  The Judge’s comment was simply that Applicant had
not substantiated his claims of debt resolution.  Moreover, the Judge made findings about the things
Applicant has cited in making this particular argument, for example his student loan consolidation
plan.  Applicant has not made a proffer sufficient to support a reasonable inference that he actually
submitted additional evidence within the requisite period of time.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-
07169 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 18, 2013).  Applicant was not denied the due process afforded by the
Directive.7   
Applicant cites to his favorable evidence, such as his good security record, his resolution of
certain debts, etc.  Concerning his prior experience holding a clearance, it is foreseeable that even
a person with a prior good record could experience circumstances that raise doubt about his future
judgment.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013).
Neither is it sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.   
5
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, regarding both the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                  
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
