 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 13-01343 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Appellant: Nicole A. Smith, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by her past financial problems. 
She turned to gambling to deal with personal issues. Over the course of two years, she 
gambled away a substantial sum of her family’s savings and accumulated about 
$40,000 in debts. She voluntarily sought professional help for her gambling problem and 
has not gambled in five years. She satisfied her debts and her finances are under 
control. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with 
DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). On March 26, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing to establish her continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
On June 30, 2014, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed with a hearing in the case. On July 16, 2014, a 
notice of hearing was issued setting the hearing for August 5, 2014. The hearing was 
 
2 
 
 
held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called her husband as a 
witness, and offered exhibits (Ax.) A – G, which were admitted without objection. The 
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on August 13, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant, who is in her forties, is married and has three children. She has been 
working for her current employer for 25 years, and her recent performance appraisal 
reflects that she “exceeds” the requirements of her position. (Ax. F at 6) She has held a 
security clearance since 2006.1  
 
Over the past dozen years, Applicant has experienced two periods of financial 
trouble. The first occurred in about 2001, when Applicant and her husband hired a 
contractor to renovate the home they have owned and lived in for the past twenty years. 
The contractor absconded with their money without completing the renovations. 
Applicant and her husband used credit cards to complete the project. They eventually 
fell behind on their credit card payments and, upon the advice of counsel, filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Their debts were discharged through bankruptcy in 2003.2  
 
Applicant’s finances rebounded and remained relatively strong until 2007, when 
she turned to gambling as a way to escape problems at work and in her personal life. 
Also, Applicant was going through a midlife crisis and gambling became a way to infuse 
some excitement in her life and distract from the issues she was going through. Around 
the same time, Applicant and her husband inherited a piece of property and purchased 
several investment properties, which they rented to generate extra income.3  
 
Applicant’s frequency and scope of gambling and her losses steadily increased. 
She accepted lines of credit offered by the casinos in order to continue to gamble. 
Between June 2007 and March 2008, currency transaction reports submitted by the 
casinos to the U.S. Government reflect 25 transactions, both winnings and losses, by 
Applicant totaling over $425,000. (Gx. 3) Applicant estimates that between 2007 and 
2009 she lost about $120,000, depleting all of her family’s savings. She testified that 
she and her family were “living paycheck to paycheck.” (Tr. at 66) After her investment 
properties stopped generating sufficient rental income, she became delinquent in 
repaying her gambling debts. In 2009, the unpaid gambling debts resulted in judgments 
totaling about $40,000.4  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 34-35, 48, 79-85, 115; Gx. 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-19; 33-34, 38, 68-72. 
 
3 Tr. at 17-19, 35-37, 48-52, 55-56, 86-96, 116. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-27, 38-41, 53-66, 101-104, 106, 110-113, 116-117. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant voluntarily reported the judgments to her facility security officer.5 Based 
on the security briefings she received over the years, Applicant recognized the 
judgments constituted a significant change in her financial situation that needed to be 
reported.6 She also voluntarily disclosed her gambling debts on her recent security 
clearance application.7  
 
In 2009, after revealing her gambling problem to a close friend, Applicant began 
attending Gambler’s Anonymous (GA). She stopped gambling and paid her gambling 
debts through a combination of garnishments and negotiated settlements. She returned 
to school, earning a bachelor’s degree in 2009 and a master’s degree in 2013. She is 
now heavily involved in religious and community activities, and is an avid cyclist. She 
recognizes her past errors in judgment and continues to attend GA.8 One of her GA 
sponsors, who retired after nearly 40 years of federal service and was a member of the 
Senior Executive Service, submitted a character reference “strongly urging that 
(Applicant) be allowed to retain her clearance” because of the positive steps he has 
witnessed her take “to grow and recover.”9 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
                                                          
5 Tr. at 75. 
 
6 Tr. at 114-115. 
 
7 Tr. at 115; Gx. 1 at 37. 
 
8 Tr. at 27-28, 44-45, 61, 66-68, 74-79, 96-101, 105-111, 114-115, 118; Gx. 2; Ax. C, Ax D at 2.  
 
9 Ax. D at 1.  
 
4 
 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.10 However, a judge must decide each case based on 
its own merits because there is no per se rule requiring disqualification.11 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.12 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7.13 Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding an individual with financial problems is explained 
at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
10 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect 
and safeguard classified information). See also, ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (A judge’s predictive 
determination “is made by identifying and then evaluating behaviors or circumstances that have an 
articulable nexus to the ability or willingness to safeguard classified information.”). 
 
13 See also, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 4 (App. Bd. July 25, 2014) (“an adverse decision under the 
Directive is not a determination that the applicant is disloyal. Rather, such a decision signifies that the 
applicant has engaged in conduct or has otherwise experienced circumstances that raise questions about 
his or her judgment and reliability. Such questions, if not mitigated by the applicant, can impugn his or her 
fitness for access to national secrets.”). 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s gambling problem resulted in the loss of a significant portion of her 
family’s life savings and generated a substantial amount of gambling debt. Her reckless 
conduct raises serious concerns about her security suitability. Applicant’s gambling 
problem and the resulting judgments, as well as her past financial problems, establish 
the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, 
gambling problems, or other issues of security concern; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(i): compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an 
unsuccessful attempt to stop gambling, “chasing losses” (i.e. increasing 
the bets or returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of 
gambling losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling 
debts, family conflict or other problems caused by gambling.  
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The mitigating conditions that are potentially relevant in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s compulsive gambling habit took place over a relatively short period of 
time from 2007 to 2009. Although the amount she gambled and the frequency of her 
gambling at casinos during that two-year window raises concerns about her suitability, 
Applicant voluntarily sought professional help and has not engaged in similar conduct in 
five years. During the past five years, she has also taken positive steps to change the 
internal and external factors that led her to gambling in the first place. She returned to 
 
6 
 
 
school, earning her undergraduate and graduate degrees. She is now heavily involved 
in volunteer and other constructive activities, and continues to attend GA. She 
addressed and resolved the gambling debts that she amassed. She has not incurred 
any other delinquent debt and her current financial situation is good.14 AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(c), and 20(d) apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).15  
 
 Applicant turned to gambling to deal with problems in her life. She became 
intoxicated by the “high-roller” lifestyle and her judgment became seriously impaired. 
She gambled away a significant portion of the money she and her husband had saved 
and accumulated substantial gambling debt that took years to resolve.  
 
 Applicant’s gambling addiction and the significant debts she incurred left her 
potentially vulnerable to undue pressure, coercion, and duress. She began mitigating 
these concerns by immediately and voluntarily reporting her gambling debts to her 
security officer. By doing so, Applicant also demonstrated that she can be trusted to 
place her security obligations and responsibilities over her own interests. She fully 
mitigated the security concerns about her potential vulnerability by fully resolving the 
gambling debts. 
 
 Applicant’s past conduct also raised serious questions about her judgment and 
reliability. However, five years have passed since she last gambled. She recognizes the 
mistakes she made in the past and has taken positive steps not to repeat them in the 
future. She has filled her life with positive activities, such as furthering her education 
and volunteering her time to help others and her community. Of particular note, 
Applicant voluntarily sought professional help for her gambling addiction and continues 
to attend GA. Applicant presented significant, positive behavioral changes indicative of 
a lifestyle antithetical to the type of gambling that raised concerns about her suitability to 
                                                          
14 Applicant’s past financial problems that led her to file and have her debts discharged through 
bankruptcy in 2003 were due to matters beyond her control. Applicant’s strong financial position in the 
years following the bankruptcy allowed her and her family to weather, to a point, the financial harm 
caused by her gambling. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b). 
 
15 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
continue to hold a security clearance.16 For all the reasons noted herein, I find that 
Applicant met her heavy burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by her past 
financial problems. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (affirming grant of a clearance where individual 
provided clear evidence of financial reform). 
