 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00749 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 9, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 
2014, scheduling the hearing for August 12, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 
21, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2001. He is applying for a security clearance. He served in 
the U.S. military from 1988 until he was honorably discharged in 1992. He is a high 
school graduate. He is married for the second time. He has two children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $12,157 in state taxes for tax year 1997 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and $6,402 for tax year 1998 (SOR ¶ 1.b). It also alleges that Applicant 
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2004, and the case was dismissed in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
Applicant admitted that he filed the Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but he denied owing the 
state taxes. 
 
 Applicant did not file federal income tax returns for tax years 1995, 1997, 1999, 
and 2001. He stated that a co-worker was supposed to prepare and file his income tax 
returns, but unbeknownst to Applicant, she failed to do so. The IRS filed a $15,767 tax 
lien against him in 2002. Applicant consulted with an attorney, who advised him to file a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy.2 
 
 The trustee for Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed an annual report in 
September 2009 and a final report in October 2009. The reports listed claims for 
attorney’s fees ($2,000), collection companies ($1,300 and $169) and the IRS ($8,069; 
$19,620; and $8,402). The reports noted that all the claims were paid, with the 
exception of $5,317 owed to the IRS. Applicant’s statement that he paid all his back 
taxes owed to the IRS is corroborated by IRS documents that show he received refunds 
for tax years 2011 and 2012.3 
 
 Applicant never lived in the state that filed tax liens against him in 2000 and 
2001. He stated that the company he worked for in the 1990s was headquartered out of 
the state. He spent a few days working in the state, but not enough to require him to file 
state tax returns and pay state taxes. He believes his company mistakenly reported his 
annual income to the state. In July 2014, the state confirmed that Applicant does not 
owe any state taxes for tax years 1997 and 1998.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-27; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 6; AE C. 
 
3 Tr. at 19, 21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 7; AE B, C. 
 
4 Tr. at 17-19; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 6; AE A, D, E. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. He stated that he learned his 
lesson and is now diligent about filing his income tax returns and paying his taxes on 
time. His current financial situation is sound.5  
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals show that he is a valued employee. His 
company awarded him a cash grant that is given to “select employees who show great 
potential and deliver superb results.”6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 22-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
6 GE 2; AE F. 
 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in an effort to resolve his unpaid federal 
income taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege that Applicant owed $12,157 and $6,402 in state 
taxes for tax years 1997 and 1998. Applicant established that the information was 
incorrect and he never owed taxes to the state. Accordingly, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant resolved his federal income taxes several years ago. He learned from 
the experience and is now diligent in filing his tax returns and paying his taxes. His 
current financial situation is sound.  
 
 I find that Applicant made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial 
problems have been resolved. They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, his favorable work history, the 
factors that led to his financial problems, and the steps he took to remedy those 
problems.  
 
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
