 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00058 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of circumstances beyond his 
control. Although he should have been more diligent in addressing his delinquent debts, 
documentary evidence shows he contacted creditors, established payment plans, and 
has been making payments on his debts. Now that his wife has full-time employment, 
their combined income should be sufficient for Applicant to resolve his financial 
problems in the near future. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 9, 2013. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) on March 7, 2014.1 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge 
on March 29, 2014. The case was assigned to me on May 23, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the first notice of hearing on June 3, 
2014 convening a hearing for June 20, 2014. Applicant retained counsel and requested 
a postponement on June 10, 2014. The hearing was convened on July 1, 2014.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant 
testified, and presented exhibits AE A through K. AE K was received post-hearing with 
seven enclosures. Attached to his answer to the SOR, Applicant also submitted a 15-
page document, which was made part of the record with his SOR. All exhibits were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 10, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR factual allegations. 
His admissions are hereby incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all 
the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1988, and completed a few college courses. He married his first wife in 
1990 and was divorced in 1996. He married his current wife in 1996. He has two 23-
year-old stepdaughters, a 23-year-old daughter, and two sons, ages 17 and 13. He 
enlisted in the U.S. Army in September 1998, and served honorably until July 2001, 
when he received a medical discharge. He was an E-4 at the time of his discharge. 
Applicant receives a $700 disability pension. While in the service, Applicant possessed 
a secret security clearance. He never compromised or caused others to compromise 
classified information. 
 
Applicant has been employed with different government contractors since 
November 2001. He is currently a fuels operator providing services at a military 
installation. He requires a security clearance to continue performing his duties. 
Applicant disclosed in his 2013 SCA that he had financial problems, which included a 
judgment, numerous delinquent debts, and a delinquent mortgage. The subsequent 
background investigation disclosed the 11 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems started in 2007 as a result of his wife’s unstable 
employment history. While she was working full-time, they were current on their 
financial obligations with their combined incomes. In 2007, she lost her full-time job and 
was forced to work part-time jobs. She was unemployed in-between jobs. SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.i alleged delinquent debts for medical services provided to Applicant’s son in 
2011, as a result of a broken arm. During 2012-2013 one of his sons was hospitalized 
several times because of problems with depression and suicidal ideations. 
 
Applicant believed that his son’s medical expenses were paid under his wife’s 
work insurance plan. Apparently, the medical expenses accrued when she had no 
 
3 
 
 
insurance coverage because she was working part-time or was unemployed. Applicant 
did not find out about the delinquent medical debts until April-May 2013.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c alleged delinquent debts for medical services provided to 
Applicant’s son that are in collection by agency A. Applicant presented documentary 
evidence showing that he established a payment plan and made payments from July 
2013 to July 2014. (Answer to DOHA Interrogatories, and AE K-3) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.g alleged delinquent debts for medical services provided to 
Applicant’s son that were in collection by agency D. Applicant presented documentary 
evidence showing that he established a payment plan and made five $50 payments in 
2013, and three payments in 2014. (Answer to the SOR, and AE F, AE K-2) Collection 
agency D stopped collecting the debts in 2014. Applicant is in communication with the 
new collection agency to continue the payment plan, but as of the hearing date, he had 
not started making payments. He promised to start making payments in the near future.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i alleged delinquent debts for medical services provided to 
Applicant’s son that are in collection by agency U. Applicant presented documentary 
evidence showing that he established a payment plan and started making payments in 
November 2013. Since then he has made nine payments, the last one in June 2014. 
(AE K-4) 
 
Applicant is over $30,000 delinquent on his mortgage payments. He stopped 
making his mortgage payments in April 2013. (SOR ¶ 1.j) Applicant explained that his 
mortgage delinquency is the result of his wife’s unstable employment history, his father 
passing away, and his son’s unexpected medical expenses. When his father passed 
away, Applicant paid for his father’s burial expenses and then continued to help his 
mother financially. He also admitted that after his father died, he neglected his own 
financial obligations.  
 
Applicant is currently seeking a loan modification. According to the documents 
submitted, he is undergoing a trial period for the loan modification to take place. 
Pursuant to the loan modification agreement, he scheduled a payment of $1,513 on July 
3, 2014, and a $700 payment on July 18, 2014. (AE K-6) 
 
Concerning the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, Applicant contacted the creditor and is 
in the process of establishing a payment plan. 
 
Applicant testified that his financial situation has improved. Both he and his wife 
are currently working full-time. With their combined incomes, totaling around $75,000, 
they are in a stable financial situation. He believes that his current income will allow him 
to continue making his payment agreements. Additionally, his son is stable and has not 
had any additional medical problems. Applicant and his family modified their lifestyles to 
meet their financial obligations and they live within their financial means. He also 
presented a financial counseling certificate dated July 1, 2014. (AE K-1) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant purchased a new car in June 2012 for $28,000. He explained that he 
had no other choice because his old car required expensive repairs and too much 
maintenance. He has not acquired any other large debts since then. He no longer uses 
credit cards to pay for his purchases. A review of Applicant’s credit reports shows no 
evidence that he is living outside of his financial means. On the contrary, his credit 
reports show that he paid several delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR after they 
were charged off.  
 
Applicant was candid and upfront during the security clearance investigation 
process. He disclosed his financial problems in his 2013 SCA. He also candidly 
discussed his financial problems with a government investigator in October 2013, and at 
his hearing. Applicant’s neighbors and friends consider him to be hard-working, honest, 
and trustworthy. He is an asset to his community and a good friend. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
 
5 
 
 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his wife’s unstable work history since 
2007. Because of her part-time work and periods of unemployment, she was unable to 
assist Applicant paying the family’s day-to-day expenses and debts. Additionally, 
Applicant’s son incurred medical expenses that were not covered by insurance. 
Applicant also paid for his father’s burial expenses and assisted his mother with her 
day-to-day living expenses. As a result, Applicant did not have the financial means to 
pay both his family’s day-to-day living expenses and his debts. Financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 
19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Financial considerations mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are recent and ongoing. AG ¶¶ 20(b), (c), and (d) apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of circumstances beyond his control, i.e., 
his wife’s unstable work history; his son’s medical problems that led to most of the debts 
alleged in the SOR; and the financial expenses related to his father’s passing and 
assisting his mother with her financial situation.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant should have been 
more diligent contacting his creditors, setting up payment plans, and in his efforts to 
resolve his financial problems. Notwithstanding, Applicant started his efforts to resolve 
his financial problems in August 2013. He contacted creditors, established payment 
plans, and has been making frequent payments. He has initiated good-faith efforts to 
repay his creditors. He is in the process of establishing his financial responsibility. 
Additionally, he participated in financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant’s wife is currently employed and provides financial assistance to pay 
the debts. His son is doing well and he is now covered by medical insurance. In light of 
Applicant’s recent efforts to resolve his financial problems and his history of making 
payments, I find that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
being resolved. The remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable to the facts in 
this case and do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant honorably served in the Army for close to three years, and was 
medically discharged in 2001. He possessed a security clearance while in the service. 
He has been working for government contractors since 2001. He disclosed his financial 
problems in his 2013 SCA, and was candid and forthcoming during the security 
clearance process.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of circumstances beyond his 
control. But, he should have been more diligent addressing his delinquent debts. 
Notwithstanding, he contacted creditors, established payment plans, and has been 
making somewhat consistent payments on his debts. Now that his wife has full-time 
 
7 
 
 
employment, their combined income is sufficient for Applicant to pay his family day-to-
day living expenses and his debts.  
 
Applicant has learned his lesson by going through the security clearance 
process. He now understands that his financial responsibility is a security concern for 
the Government. He is fully aware that his failure to maintain financial responsibility will 
adversely impact his ability to possess a security clearance in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
