 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No.14-00546  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines. F (Financial 
Considerations), E (Personal Conduct), and B (Foreign Influence). Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 8, 2013. 
On March 19, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F, E, and B. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 27, 2014; answered it on April 16, 2014; 
and requested a decision on the record without a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel requested a hearing on May 2, 2014, and the case was 
assigned to me on May 15, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on May 27, 2014, scheduling the hearing for July 10, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Department Counsel submitted a demonstrative 
exhibit summarizing the evidence, which is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HX) I. Department Counsel also requested that I take administrative notice of relevant 
facts about Peru. The request to take administrative notice is attached to the record as 
HX II. I took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until July 18, 2014. He timely 
submitted AX K through M, which also were admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel’s comments regarding AX K through M are attached to the record as HX III. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 18, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.t. He 
admitted incorrectly answering the questions on his SCA, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.c, but 
he denied intentionally falsifying his answers. He admitted SOR ¶¶ 3.a-3.c. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old electrician who has been offered employment by a 
federal contractor, contingent upon his receipt of a security clearance. (GX 1 at 12.) On 
his SCA, Applicant stated that he has never held a security clearance. However, during 
a personal subject interview (PSI) in September 2013 and in his answer to the SOR, he 
stated that he received a security clearance in 2008. At the hearing, he testified that his 
clearance expired in 2013. (Tr. 6.) 
 
Applicant was born in Peru, came to the United States in August 1993, and 
became a U.S. citizen in December 2004. (GX 1 at 7; AX A.) His mother is deceased. 
His father is a citizen of Peru residing in the United States. His stepmother was born in 
Peru, but she is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing in the United States. Three of his 
sisters are natives of Peru, who are naturalized U.S. citizens residing in the United 
States. One sister is a native-born U.S. citizen and resides in the United States. (GX 1 
at 21-36.) He has two stepbrothers who are citizens and residents of the United States. 
(Tr. 40.) Applicant has aunts and uncles in Peru but he has virtually no contact with 
them. One of his uncles is a police officer in Peru. (Tr. 40-42.) 
 
Applicant married a native of Peru residing in the United States in July 2006. 
They divorced in October 2008. They had one child, who is a citizen and resident of the 
United States. (AX B.) 
 
Applicant married his current wife, also a native of Peru, in November 2009. His 
wife has been an airline flight attendant for ten years. She lives in Peru with their two 
children, who are dual citizens of Peru and the United States. (AX C and D.) His wife’s 
 
3 
 
parents are citizens and residents of Peru. Her father is a retired police officer. (Tr. 42-
43.) Applicant has monthly telephonic contact with his wife’s parents. (GX 4 at 8.) He 
has daily telephonic contact with his wife and visits her regularly. (GX 4 at 5; Tr. 39, 56.) 
 
Applicant has applied for a visa for his wife to immigrate to the United States. (AX 
E through J.) He testified that his wife and children were scheduled to arrive in the 
United States in early August, in time to begin school in September. (Tr. 11-12, 44.) 
While he was employed, he regularly sent about $900 per month to his wife. He has 
been sending her about $120 per month during his unemployment. (AX M.) 
 
Applicant worked on overseas construction projects for federal contractors in Iraq 
from November 2007 to April 2008, Jordan from January to May 2009, Afghanistan from 
August to November 2009, Iraq in May and June 2011, and South Korea from June to 
October 2011 and January to February 2012. Between overseas projects, he worked in 
the United States. He was unemployed from September 2010 to May 2011 and July 
2012 to June 2013. He worked as a temporary employee for two months before being 
laid off in August 2013. (Tr. 46-48.) He has been unemployed since August 2013. (GX 2 
at 2-4.) Two former coworkers submitted letters describing him as dependable, reliable, 
and a hard worker. (AX K and L.) 
 
Applicant’s income was at its highest in 2009 and from May 2011 to June 2013, 
when he was making from $55,000 to $60,000 per year. (Tr. 46.) He now collects 
unemployment, lives with his father for monthly rent of about $400, and drives his 
sister’s car. (Tr. 49-50.) 
 
Applicant admitted the 20 delinquent debts, totaling about $32,187, alleged in the 
SOR. The oldest debts became delinquent in March and October 2008, and the most 
recent became delinquent in October 2012. In his answer, he stated that he intended to 
contact his creditors and begin making payments. As of the date of the hearing, none of 
the debts had been resolved. He made one $60 payment on the unsatisfied $4,150 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but he had taken no action on any of the other 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 50-54.) 
 
In addition to the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant owes about $4,000 in 
federal taxes. The debt arose because he and his ex-wife both claimed their son as a 
dependent. (Tr. 57.) He has a child-support arrearage of about $8,000. (Tr. 58.) 
 
In his SCA, Applicant answered “No” to the question asking if he had any 
judgments entered against him during the last seven years, and he did not disclose the 
judgments alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.b. He also answered “No” to the question asking 
if he had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency during the last seven 
years, and he did not disclose the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e through 1.t. 
Finally, he answered “No” to the question whether he had any accounts or credit cards 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for nonpayment, and he did not disclose the 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
4 
 
At the hearing, Applicant denied knowing that two judgments had been entered 
against him for delinquent debts when he submitted his SCA. However, he admitted 
knowing that he had delinquent debts and that collection letters were being sent to his 
father’s home while he was deployed overseas, and that some of his credit card 
accounts were charged off or cancelled. (Tr. 59-60.) Based on his responses at the 
hearing, I conclude that he did not intentionally falsify his answer to the question about 
judgments entered against him, but he intentionally failed to disclose that he had debts 
turned over to collection agencies and had credit card accounts cancelled, charged off, 
or suspended for nonpayment. 
 
I have taken administrative notice that Peru is a constitutional, multi-party 
republic. The United States established diplomatic relations with Peru in 1827, following 
Peru’s independence from Spain. Peru is a key U.S. partner in Latin America, and the 
two countries have strong, positive, and cooperative relations. In the past decade, Peru 
has experienced consistent economic growth, poverty reduction, and broad support for 
democracy. Recent national elections were widely seen as free and fair.  
 
I have also taken administrative notice that Peru has human rights problems 
including violence against women and children, trafficking in persons, and government 
corruption that undermines law enforcement. Peru is the world’s top potential producer 
of cocaine and the second-largest cultivator of coca. The Shining Path terrorist 
organization is active in Peru and has expressed its intention to target U.S. interests. 
Shining Path violence has been mainly against Peruvian security services. Violent crime 
is common in Lima and other large cities.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
5 
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts totaling about $32,187 (SOR ¶ 1.a-1.t). 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations.) The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s debts are 
numerous, ongoing, and were not incurred under conditions making them unlikely to 
recur. Applicant’s periods of unemployment were conditions beyond his control, but he 
did not act responsibly. He did not contact his creditors. Instead, he ignored his debts 
rather than trying to resolve them. He has not obtained financial counseling, and his 
financial situation is not under control. He has not disputed any of the debts. 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his answers to three financial questions 
on his SCA (SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.c). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a) (“deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .”). When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business 
experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions at the hearing are sufficient to establish that he 
intentionally and falsely answered “No” to the questions about debts turned over to 
collection agencies and credit card accounts that were suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for nonpayment. However, because the information he received about his 
delinquent debts while he was working overseas was frequently routed through his 
father, I found his testimony that he was unaware of the two judgments plausible and 
credible. Thus, I conclude that he did not intentionally and falsely answer “No” to the 
question about judgments entered against him. However, based on his false answers to 
two of the three financial questions, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established, because Applicant did not acknowledge or 
disclose the delinquent debts until he was confronted with the evidence during his PSI, 
six weeks after submitting his SCA. Even when he acknowledged the delinquent debts, 
he claimed that he did not disclose them on his SCA because he had forgotten about 
them. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not fully established. Applicant’s falsifications were not minor 
because they undermined the integrity of the security clearance process. His 
falsifications were arguably infrequent because only one SCA was involved, but they did 
not occur under unique circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s wife (SOR ¶ 3.a), two children (SOR ¶ 3.b), 
and parents-in-law (SOR ¶ 3.c) are citizens and residents of Peru. Applicant’s 
admissions establish SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.c. However, SOR ¶ 3.b is only partially 
established, because the documentary evidence submitted by Applicant establishes that 
his children are dual citizens of Peru and the United States. 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this 
case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and  
 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003). There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family 
member in a foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 1, 2002). There is also a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection 
for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case 
No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002); see also ISCR 
Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011).   
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Peru is a friendly country, but the presence of Applicant’s family members in 
Peru, where they are vulnerable to the violence associated with drug trafficking and the 
Shining Path terrorist group is sufficient to establish the heightened risk in AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(d) and the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). Although Applicant’s wife 
lives apart from him in Peru, they visit each other frequently and share living quarters 
during their visits. 
 
10 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. Applicant’s wife, children, and in-laws live in a 
country where drug trafficking is rampant, governmental corruption is a serious problem, 
his uncle is a police officer, and his father-in-law is a retired police officer. Terrorist 
groups actively seek to disrupt U.S. interests, and they specifically target security 
forces, include the police. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that he has 
ties of obligation to his wife’s immediate family members, and his sense of loyalty or 
obligation to them is more than “minimal.” However, he has deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. He has lived in the United States for 21 
years and has been a U.S citizen for ten years. His father, stepmother, siblings, and 
stepbrothers all live in the United States. All his immediate family members except his 
wife and father are U.S. citizens. His children are U.S. citizens, and his wife intends to 
immigrate to the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) is established for Applicant’s aunts and uncles in Peru. However, he 
has not rebutted the presumption that his monthly contact with his wife’s parents is not 
casual. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
11 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F, E, and B in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is undoubtedly a loyal American and a devoted husband and father. He 
has held a security clearance in the past, and he has worked for many years as an 
employee of federal contractors. However, his inattention to his financial responsibilities 
and his lack of candor during the security clearance process raise serious doubts about 
his trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, E, 
and B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on his foreign family connections, 
but he has not mitigated the security concerns based on his financial irresponsibility and 
lack of candor on his SCA. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
