 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-00514   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated approximately $27,000 of delinquent debts since 2003, 
and failed to file a 2011 Federal income tax return.  Resulting security concerns were 
not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 17, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On April 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On May 9, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 4.) On 
June 12, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant that same day. He received the FORM on June 25, 2014, and was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. He provided no additional 
information. DOHA assigned the case to me on August 7, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five of the six allegations contained 
in Paragraphs 1.a through 1.f, except Paragraph 1.c, which he disputed. (Item 4.)  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and divorced. He has a 12-year-old son from a marriage 
that ended in 2003. He attended high school between 1990 and 1993. In November 
1996 he enlisted in the Air Force and in July 2002 he received an honorable discharge. 
He was then unemployed until May 2003 when he started working for a defense 
contractor. He is a network engineer. (Items 5, 7.)  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a 2003 automobile accident in which 
he received some injuries. He asserted that his insurance company failed to pay the 
necessary medical bills promptly, which caused some of his bills to become delinquent. 
(Item 7.) During a May 2013 interview with a Government investigator, he stated that he 
“inadvertently neglected to file his 2011 federal income tax return.” (Item 7.) He was not 
concerned because he generally received a refund and had not received any notice 
from the Internal Revenue Service about the unfiled return. He stated he intended to file 
the return. (Item 7.) He discussed five delinquent debts and told the investigator that he 
“was willing to pay any just debts with evidence of obligation.” (Item 7.) 
  
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) dated April 30, 2013, the SOR alleged 
five delinquent debts totaling $27,080, dating from 2007 to 2012, and an unfiled Federal 
income tax return. (Item 6.) The status of each allegation is as follows: 
 
 1. Applicant asserted that he filed his 2011 Federal income tax return, alleged in  
SOR ¶ 1.a, but provided no documentation to confirm the filing. (Item 4.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
 2. The $10,810 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b arose after Applicant’s automobile was 
repossessed. Applicant asserted that he negotiated a repayment plan with the creditor 
and was making payments. He did not submit proof of any payments made on that plan. 
(Item 4.) It is unresolved. 
 
 3. The $15,830 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is owed to a credit card company. 
Applicant admitted that he owed $6,000 of the debt, but disputed the remaining fees. He 
 
 
3 
 
 
provided no information to document that he had filed a formal dispute of the debt. (Item 
4.) It is unresolved. 
 
 4. The $271 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is owed to a cable company. (Item 7.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
 5. The $119 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e may be an unpaid medical bill. (Item 7.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
 6. The $50 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f may be an unpaid medical bill. (Item 7.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
 Applicant did not submit evidence that he obtained credit counseling or sought 
assistance with resolving his debts.  He did not provide a budget. He submitted no 
evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, the level of 
responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive 
information and observation of security procedures. He provided no character 
references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the  
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts between 2003 and 2012 that he has 
been unable or unwilling to satisfy. He also failed to file a 2011 Federal income tax 
 
 
5 
 
 
return. The evidence raises all three security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial obligations: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2003 and continue to date. 
Because he failed to prove that he addressed any debts or filed the 2011 income tax 
return, he did not demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to continue or recur. His 
reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness in managing delinquent debts and tax 
obligations remain a concern. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 
20(a).  
 
 Applicant asserted that his financial problems arose in 2003 as a result of an 
automobile accident. He provided no explanation for not resolving any debts in the 
intervening 11 years. He did not submit sufficient evidence to demonstrate that his 
financial problems arose as a consequence of circumstances that were beyond his 
control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling, and there are no 
clear indications that his delinquent debts or unfiled tax return are under control. Hence, 
AG ¶ 20(c) has no application. Because Applicant provided no evidence documenting a 
good-faith effort to resolve debts or file the 2011 income tax return AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
 
 
6 
 
 
apply. Although Applicant claimed that he had a reasonable basis to dispute a large 
credit card debt, he provided no proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions taken to resolve the issue through the dispute process. AG ¶ 20(e) 
has no application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 39-year old man 
who honorably served in the Air Force for six years. He has worked for a defense 
contractor since May 2003. The SOR-listed debts dating from 2003 to 2012 total about 
$27,000.  
 
 In May 2013 a Government investigator interviewed Applicant about five 
delinquent debts and an unfiled 2011 Federal income tax return. Applicant said he 
would pay any debts that he justifiably owed. One year later, on April 17, 2014, the 
Department of Defense issued a SOR and alleged that those five debts, discussed 
during his previous interview, raised security concerns. In May 2014 Applicant 
answered the SOR, stating that he was resolving the $10,830 debt. During that May 
2013 interview Applicant also asserted that he “inadvertently” failed to file a 2011 tax 
return, but that he intended to file it. On June 25, 2014, Applicant received the FORM, 
which specifically informed him that he failed to submit proof of payment or resolution of 
any delinquent debt, including a small debt of $50, and that he had not provided proof of 
filing the 2011 Federal income tax return. Applicant had 30 days to supply additional 
information in response to the FORM, but did not do so.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He had sufficient notice of the 
Government’s concerns and time to address them. His excuse for not filing a 2011 
income tax return is not credible, and raises questions about his judgment. He is a 
mature individual, who according to his interview, has filed many returns in the past and 
knew or should have known of his yearly legal obligation. He did not meet his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
