1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-00468 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 18 charged-off, placed-for-collection, or delinquent accounts, 
which totaled approximately $80,000. Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to sensitive information and eligibility for a 
public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On March 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
2 
 
(Regulation), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
On March 18, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 12, 2014. The FORM contained six 
attachments. On May 27, 2014, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s undated response. On July 18, 
2014, I was assigned the case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admits all of the SOR debts. He asserts he has contacted what he 
referred to as a “debt collection agency” to begin monthly payments on his delinquent 
student loans. (FORM Answer) He is seeking other means to address his remaining 
delinquent debts. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated 
herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make 
the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old who has been working for a defense contractor since 
August 2013, and is seeking to maintain a public trust position. From May 2003 to 
October 2009 he worked part-time and had a second part-time job from July 2008 
through July 2009. He worked full-time from June 2009 through October 2011. In 
October 2011, he obtained a different full-time job, which he held until obtaining his 
current full-time job. At various times between September 2007 and March 2011, he 
attended various colleges and universities. Since May 2012 he has been taking courses 
from an on-line college. In 2008, he married.  
 
On Applicant’s August 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he indicated he was receiving information and counseling from a 
debt counseling firm. (Item 5) This was not further explained. In his e-QIP, he did not 
indicate he was delinquent on any debts.  
 
 Applicant has two student loans, which total approximately $9,500, that have 
been placed for collection. He has five additional student loans totaling approximately 
$65,000 that are 120 days or more past due. He owes approximately $4,600 on nine 
collection accounts and more than $600 on two charged-off accounts. He owes $326 on 
a medical account (SOR 1.j) which is unpaid, but not alleged to be delinquent. (Item 6)  
He has provided no documentation showing any payments on any of his delinquent 
obligations.  
 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. 
Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures 
contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be 
made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of sensitive information is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concerns relating 
to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding sensitive information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a public trust position. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant has 18 delinquent accounts and one unpaid medical account that 
totaled approximately $80,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
5 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He produced no evidence of 
circumstances beyond his control. He has been full-time employed since June 2009. He 
provided no documentation showing any payments on any of his debts. Even the nine 
smaller debts of less than $500 each remain unpaid. He has not acted responsibly in 
addressing his debts. He provided no evidence he has received credit or financial 
counseling other than the statement on his e-QIP that he was receiving financial 
counseling. He provided no information as to what he had learned from that counseling. 
He has not demonstrated that his financial problems are under control or that he has a 
plan to bring them under control. There is no showing of a good-faith effort to satisfy the 
debts.  
 
 Applicant asserts he has contacted a debt collection agency to help him in 
making monthly payments on his delinquent student loans. He is also seeking ways to 
address his other delinquent debts. He provided no documentation as to what the debt 
collection agency was to do or had done. The debts remain unpaid and he has provided 
no documentation establishing a repayment plan.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that the debts were incurred under unusual conditions not likely to be 
repeated. Applicant has failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances, 
which casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
6 
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. Applicant has been fully employed for the past five 
years. He failed to assert or establish events beyond his control which caused his 
financial problems.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. A mere statement on 
his e-QIP that he was receiving financial counseling is insufficient for this mitigating 
factor to apply. Additionally, there is no clear showing that his financial obligations are 
being addressed.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant 
has failed to document any payments on any of the delinquent accounts. The mitigating 
condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account. He admitted all of 
the SOR debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The majority of the debts set forth in 
the SOR were not incurred on luxuries, but for student loans. This is not the type of debt 
that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. However, Applicant has failed to make 
payment on those loans or on his other delinquent SOR debts.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts which would mitigate the financial considerations security 
7 
 
concerns. He failed to provide documentation regarding his past efforts to address his 
delinquent debt. He failed to provide such information, and by relying solely on his 
paragraph of explanation in response to the FORM, he failed to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s:  Against Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information and occupying a public 
trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
