 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00133 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an undated response to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on June 12, 2014, and reassigned to me on June 25, 2014. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 27, 2014, scheduling 
the hearing for July 23, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2001. He seeks to retain a security clearance. He served in 
the U.S. military from 1980 until he was honorably discharged in 1983. He has an 
associate’s degree. He is married for the third time. He has three adult children from his 
first marriage.1 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts, a 1999 bankruptcy, and failure to file state 
and federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012. Applicant admitted filing 
bankruptcy and owing all the debts at one point, but he indicated that three of the debts 
were paid. He admitted that he did not file his tax returns when they were due, but he 
stated that the returns have now been filed.  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999, and his debts were discharged the 
same year. He attributed the necessity to file bankruptcy to his 1998 divorce. He 
married his current wife in 2011. He attributed his recent financial problems to her failed 
business and maintaining two households for a period. He withdrew money from his 
401(k) retirement account to help her business, which contributed to his tax problems.2 
 
 Applicant contracted with a debt-management company in about August 2012 to 
assist in resolving his debts. He pays the company $112 every two weeks. The 
company negotiates with his creditors and uses the accumulated funds to settle his 
debts. He enrolled seven debts from the SOR in the company’s debt-resolution plan: 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($2,862), 1.c ($1,599), 1.d ($3,829), 1.e ($1,981), 1.f ($625), 1.g ($793), 
and1.l ($700). The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e have been settled and paid.3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($1,121), 1.i ($1,736), 
1.j ($392), 1.k ($3,688), and 1.n ($300). The $3,688 debt for the deficiency owed on a 
car loan after the car was repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.k) has been paid through garnishment 
of Applicant’s wages. He stated that he plans to pay the remaining debts.4 
 
 Applicant had a tax specialist who prepared his income tax returns. She informed 
him before his 2011 income tax returns were due that she was no longer able to 
prepare his returns. Applicant stated that his income tax returns then just “slipped 
through the cracks.” He retained a new tax firm, and he filed his 2011 and 2012 state 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-13, 17-19, 33, 34; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-19, 22-24; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-22, 29; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 19, 22-23, 28-29, 38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
3 
 
and federal income tax returns in about June 2014. He owes the IRS about $3,700 for 
tax year 2011 and $1,500 for 2012. He still owes his state about $300 for tax year 2008 
(SOR ¶ 1.n) and about $1,500 for tax years 2011 and 2012. His tax company will 
negotiate payment plans with the IRS and his state. He indicated that the IRS and his 
state will not consider payment plans until he files his 2013 tax returns. He has 
extensions for those returns. He anticipates filing his 2013 income tax returns before the 
extensions expire in October 2014. He has not received financial counseling.5 
 
 Applicant is a patriotic American who cares about this country. He is proud of his 
service in the U.S. military and that his work helps save American lives. He donates to 
the Wounded Warrior Project. He stated that he would never do anything to harm this 
country.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 24-32, 39; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. at 12-13, 16. 
 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He filed bankruptcy in 1999. He did 
not file federal and state income tax returns when they were due for tax years 2011 and 
2012. He accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay 
his financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributed his 1999 bankruptcy to his first divorce, and his recent 
financial problems were caused by his current wife’s failed business. Those events were 
beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 The $3,688 debt alleged SOR ¶ 1.k has been paid through garnishment of 
Applicant’s wages. He has been paying $112 every two weeks to a debt-management 
company since about August 2012. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($2,862) and 1.e 
($1,981) have been settled and paid. Five additional debts are enrolled in the 
company’s debt-resolution plan. There are four remaining debts that are not enrolled in 
the plan. Applicant filed his 2011 and 2012 federal and state income tax returns, but he 
did not pay the taxes owed for those years. He also owes his state for tax year 2008.  
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy is sufficiently attenuated by the passage of time to no 
longer generate independent security concerns. The SOR allegations that cover the 
bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a), the paid debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.k), and the failure to file 
income tax returns (SOR ¶ 1.m) are mitigated.  
 
 The debt-resolution plan is a step in the right direction, but Applicant’s finances 
are not significantly improved because he is accruing new tax debt. While he has taken 
some steps in addressing his financial problems, he is still far from a state of financial 
stability.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s remaining 
financial problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay 
all his debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are 
not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is only applicable toward 
the debts paid through the debt-resolution plan. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable service in the U.S. military and his stable work 
history. He has had financial problems for years. He has been paying a debt-
management company for about two years. However, his finances have not significantly 
improved because he did not pay his income taxes during that period. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
