 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00526 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 August 1, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has 18 delinquent debts, totaling $10,529. Applicant testified that she 
repaid one debt, but failed to produce adequate documentation to substantiate her 
claim. All of Applicant’s other debts remain unaddressed. Additionally, security concerns 
were raised because Applicant intentionally failed to disclose her debts on her electronic 
Security Clearance Application (e-QIP). Applicant failed to mitigate the financial and 
personal conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her e-QIP on September 11, 2013. On April 22, 2014, the 
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under the guidelines for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on May 12, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on June 23, 2014. A notice of hearing 
was issued to Applicant on June 30, 2014, scheduling her hearing for July 16, 2014. 
The hearing was convened in Woodland Hills, California, as scheduled. The 
Government appeared by video-teleconference from Arlington, Virginia. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on her own behalf, called one witness, and presented Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) A. AE A was admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on July 23, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 36 years old. She has worked for her employer since 2008 and 
seeks a security clearance in connection with her employment. She is a high school 
graduate and has never been married. She is a single mother of two children, ages 14 
and 11. (GE 1; Tr. 42, 69.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR identified financial 
concerns including 18 delinquent debts totaling $10,529. Applicant’s debts appear in 
credit reports entered into evidence. Personal Conduct security concerns arose out of 
Applicant’s failure to disclose her SOR-listed debts on her e-QIP. Applicant admitted to 
SOR allegations 1.a, and 1.f through 1.l. She denied allegations 1.b through 1.e, 1.m 
through 1.r, and 2.a. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
Applicant testified that all of her debts are for medical bills she incurred while 
unemployed or under-employed from 2006 to 2008. She had no health insurance during 
that period. She testified that she was slowly addressing her debts. In approximately 
2010 she set up a repayment plan with a creditor to repay $50.56 per month until the 
debt was satisfied. She produced one bank statement dated June 23, 2014, showing a 
$50.59 deduction was made from her account on May 15, 2014, which she claimed 
satisfied the debt in full. However, the name of the creditor on her bank statement did 
not match with any creditors identified on the SOR. Further, she failed to produce 
documentation of any other payments. She testified that she intended to repay all 
creditors, although she had not made contact with any of the other creditors. She failed 
to produce adequate documentation to show she was repaying any of her SOR-listed 
debt. (AE A; Tr. 24-26, 29-30, 41-55.) 
 
Applicant’s father testified that he helped her set up a financial tracking system 
and that Applicant currently pays her debts on time. Applicant has had no formal 
financial counseling. She has approximately $300 to $500 left over each month after 
she pays her monthly financial obligations. She indicated she has savings of $600 to 
$700. (Tr. 23-37, 58-59.) 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant completed and executed her e-QIP on September 11, 2013. In 
“Section 26. Financial Record,” she was asked whether she had any judgments 
entered against her, or bills and debts that were turned over to a collection agency. She 
answered, “No.” However, she admitted to knowledge of at least some of her medical 
debts since 2010. She testified that she did not understand the questions on the e-QIP, 
and did not intentionally falsify her answers. She did not have a credit report available at 
the time she completed her e-QIP in 2013 and did not know all of the required 
information. (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 60-69.) 
 
Applicant’s father, who is also in her chain-of-command at work, indicated that 
Applicant is a responsible employee and pays excellent attention to detail. He testified 
she is a valuable asset to her employer. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
 
4 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately 18 delinquent debts 
totaling $10,529. She has not contested or otherwise addressed her delinquent 
accounts listed on her credit reports. She has $300 to $500 left after satisfying her 
monthly obligations, but has not addressed her delinquent debts in a meaningful 
manner. She has an overall “history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c) are disqualifying. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, but found inapplicable, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”1 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”2  
 
Applicant’s ongoing decision not to address her debts in a meaningful manner 
reflects poorly on her current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. She has not established that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control, or that she made a good-faith effort to repay her remaining delinquent 
accounts. While Applicant may have incurred the SOR-listed debt as a result of 
unexpected medical expenses during a time of unemployment and underemployment, 
she failed to provide evidence of responsible action to resolve the debts. None of the 
mitigating conditions were sufficiently established by the record evidence with respect to 
those debts and the financial history of which they are symptomatic. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
2 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to identify her SOR-listed debts on her e-QIP. She clearly knew 
she had debts that had not been resolved. Yet, she willfully chose not to include them 
on the e-QIP. This behavior indicates questionable judgment and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them were established in this case. Applicant did not make 
prompt or good-faith efforts to correct her falsification or concealment. She provided no 
information that indicates she was ill-advised in completing her SF 86. Falsifying 
material information is a serious offense and Applicant has done nothing to show that 
similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, she failed to take responsibility 
for her actions. She has not provided sufficient evidence to meet her burden of proof for 
her personal conduct. 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant failed to produce sufficient documentation that her delinquent debts 
have been addressed or are otherwise being resolved in a responsible manner. Her 
veracity and personal conduct are still in question. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations or Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.r:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
