1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00420
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 1, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on February 29, 2008.  On March 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 2, 2014.  He answered the
SOR in writing on April 16, 2014, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request
soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on May 19, 2014.  DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on May 21, 2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June
24, 2014.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 7, which were received
2
without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs)
A through E, which were received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of
the hearing (TR) on July 2, 2014.  I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open
until July 24, 2014, to submit additional matters.  On June 25 and June 30, 2014, he
submitted Exhibits F and G, respectively, which were received without objection.  The
record closed on July 25, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Subparagraphs 1.b., 1.d., and 1.f. of the SOR, with explanations.  He denied the factual
allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a., 1.c., and 1.e. of the SOR.  He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant is 40 years of age, and works as a painter for a defense contractor.
(TR at page 27 line 11 to page 29 line 9.)  All of his alleged past-due debts can be
attributed to his 2006 separation and his 2008 divorce.  (TR at page 29 line 10 to page
33 line 2.)  He now lives within his means and has a positive monthly cash flow.  (TR at
page 33 line 6 to page 36 line 15.)  The SOR alleges six past-due debts:
1.a. and 1.b.  These two debts are to Creditor A in an amount totaling about
$10,051.  Applicant is making monthly payment of $100 to Creditor A, as evidenced by
a letter from Creditor A and a money order receipt.  (TR at page 36 line 17 to page 37
line 23, at page 38 line 10 to page 39 line 20, and AppX B at pages 1~8.)
1.c.  This debt is to Creditor C in the amount of about $700.  Applicant has paid
this debt, as evidenced by correspondence from the creditor.  (TR at page 39 line 21 to
page 42 line 16, and AppX F at page 2.)
1.d.  This debt is to Creditor D in the amount of about $266.  Applicant is making
a good-faith effort to track down and pay this small debt, but it no longer appears on his
most recent credit reports.  (See GX 7 and AppX F the last two pages.)
1.e.  This debt is to Creditor E in the amount of about $700.  Applicant has
“settled in full” this debt, as evidenced by correspondence from the successor creditor of
this debt.  (TR at page 43 line 19 to page 44 line 6, and AppX F at page 3.)
1.f.  This last debt is to Creditor F in the amount of about $6,840.  Applicant has
to make monthly payments of $105.95 towards this debt, as evidenced by
correspondence from the successor creditor of this debt.  (TR at page 44 line 7 to page
45 line 2, and AppX G.)
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
4
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has had difficulty meeting his
financial obligations.  However, I find two countervailing Mitigating Conditions that are
applicable here.  Under Subparagraph 20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. . . .
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s past-due indebtedness is directly attributed to his 2006 separation and his
2008 divorce.  Under Subparagraph 20 (d), it may also be mitigating where “the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts.”  Applicant has either paid, is paying or has made a good-faith effort to address
all of the alleged debts.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The administrative judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
5
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Those who know Applicant in the
workplace speak most highly of him.  (AppX A.)  The record evidence leaves me without
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
For this reason, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from
his Financial Considerations, under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
