 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01054 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges three delinquent credit card 
debts, totaling $46,653. Applicant’s spouse suffers from a severe mental illness, and in 
2011, she charged numerous purchases on credit cards where Applicant was a 
cosigner. Over the last three years, Applicant paid and settled numerous debts. He has 
resolved or is in the process of resolving the last three delinquent debts listed on his 
SOR. He has established a track record of debt resolution. Financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 5, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (GE 1). On 
April 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD 
was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue a 
security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or 
revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On May 18, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR and indicated he wanted a 
hearing. (HE 3) On July 14, 2014, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to 
proceed on Applicant’s case. On July 17, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On July 18, 2014, Applicant received 
email notice of the date of the hearing. (Tr. 15-16) On August 5, 2014, DOHA issued a 
formal written hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 11, 2014. (HE 1) Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled.1 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits, and Applicant offered 
five exhibits. (Tr. 25-28, 46-47; GE 1-3; AE A-E) There were no objections, and I 
admitted GE 1-3 and AE A-E. (Tr. 26, 28-29, 47) On August 15, 2014, DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing.     
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Department Counsel moved to withdraw the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. Department 
Counsel indicated Applicant may not have had any debts currently delinquent over 90 
days or delinquent over 180 days in the previous seven years at the time he answered, 
“no” to these two questions on his November 5, 2011 SF 86. (Tr. 18-19, 46) Applicant 
did not object, and I granted the motion to withdraw SOR allegation ¶ 2.a. (Tr. 19) 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.c; 
however, he explained a law firm was resolving the three debts on his behalf. He 
admitted answering “no” to the question about delinquent debts on his November 5, 
2011 SF 86; however, he explained on his SF 86 that he had hired a law firm to resolve 
his accounts. (HE 3) Applicant emphasized in his SOR response that he believed all of 
his debts were being resolved by a law firm and were not delinquent. His admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old helicopter mechanic, who has worked continuously for 
a defense contractor for 18 years. (Tr. 8) In 1970, he graduated from high school, and 
he has not attended college. (Tr. 7) He served in the Army from 1971 to 1992, and he 
                                            
1Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing. (Tr. 
15-16) 
  
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
honorably retired from active duty. (Tr. 38-39; GE 2) When he left active duty, he was a 
first sergeant (E-8) for a special operations unit. (GE 2) He served in combat in the 
Republic of Vietnam for 11 ½ months from 1971 to 1972 and in Southwest Asia during 
Desert Shield/Storm in 1991. (Tr. 40) In 1970, he married, and his two children are ages 
30 and 36. (Tr. 7; GE 1)   
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report, Office of 
Personnel Management personnel subject interview (OPM PSI), SOR response, and 
statement at his hearing. Applicant’s spouse was responsible for paying the family debts 
and maintaining the family finances. About three years ago, she informed Applicant that 
she had spent a large sum of money on eight or nine credit card accounts, and that 
these accounts were delinquent. (Tr. 48-50) They had about $54,000 of delinquent 
credit card debt, and their mortgage was delinquent. (Tr. 48-50) His spouse was unable 
to explain what she had done to their finances and how she had spent their funds 
because of her mental illness. (Tr. 51-52)  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges three delinquent credit card debts, totaling $46,653 as 
follows: (1) ¶ 1.a ($28,090); (2) ¶ 1.b ($2,684); and (3) ¶ 1.c ($15,879). Applicant’s most 
recent credit report shows a zero balance for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and charged-off 
status. (Tr. 71) The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c may be a duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
(Tr. 71) Applicant’s credit report shows eight credit card accounts and 12 revolving 
accounts have been closed or resolved. (Tr. 72-73)    
 
In November 2011, Applicant hired a law firm to determine his responsibility for 
the delinquent debts on his credit report, and once his responsibility was established, to 
arrange settlements with his creditors. (Tr. 53-54, 57; AE C) Applicant paid his attorney 
about $1,300 monthly for 25 months. (Tr. 59-61; AE E) His attorney told Applicant not to 
communicate directly with his creditors and to leave the negotiations and 
communications to counsel. (AE C) Applicant complied with his attorney’s 
recommendations. His attorney asked the creditors to waive some of the interest 
charges on the debts. (Tr. 54-55) Some of the debts were and are being disputed 
because of violations of federal law. (Tr. 65-66; AE C) Three debts owed to the same 
creditor and totaling $55,000 were resolved. (AE C) Applicant’s spouse is no longer 
responsible for paying the family debts and handling the family finances. (Tr. 55-56) She 
does not have access to Applicant’s bank accounts and credit cards. (Tr. 55-56)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor has known him for five years and has worked closely with 
Applicant for three years. (Tr. 30) Applicant told him that he was having financial 
problems because his spouse went on a spending spree. (Tr. 34) He gave Applicant an 
excellent performance rating. (Tr. 35-36) He described Applicant as having strong 
integrity and as being diligent, responsible, honest, and reliable. (Tr. 31-33) He rated 
Applicant as being in the top ten percent of the 26 personnel he supervises. (Tr. 33) He 
recommended reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. (Tr. 31-32, 36)  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s deputy program manager indicated Applicant has worked for the 
same corporation since 1996 and had no disciplinary actions in his personnel file. (AE 
A) He has a good relationship with other employees. He is punctual, dependable, and 
professional. (AE A) Another supervisor wrote praising Applicant for his reliability, 
efficiency, initiative, good moral character, friendliness, and problem-solving ability. (AE 
B)   
 
Applicant earned numerous Army awards including the following: Meritorious 
Service Medal (MSM); Army Commendation Medal (ARCOM) (3 OLC); Army 
Achievement Medal (AAM) (1 OLC); Overseas Ribbons (OSR) (3); National Defense 
Service Medal (NDSM) (2); NCO Professional Military Education Ribbon (PMER) (3); 
Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal (AFEM); Army Good Conduct Medal (GCM) (5); Air 
Medal (3); Vietnam Service Medal (VSM) (w/CS); Vietnam Campaign Medal (VCM); 
Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation (VGCUC) w/Palm; Southwest Asia Service Medal 
(SWASM) with 2 Bronze Service Stars (BSS); and several other awards and ribbons. 
(AE D, DD Form 214)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit report, OPM PSI, SOR response, and statement at his hearing.  
 
Several of Applicant’s debts became delinquent about three years ago when his 
wife abused their credit cards. In 2011, Applicant had eight or nine delinquent credit 
card debts and a problem paying his mortgage. Applicant’s SOR alleges three 
delinquent credit card debts, totaling $46,653. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
           
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
to 20(d). AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because Applicant’s counsel did not provide 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute and evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue. Applicant’s spouse’s mental illness caused her to obtain and abuse 
credit cards. Her misuse of credit was the cause of Applicant’s financial problems, which 
is a circumstance largely beyond his control. He settled, paid, or resolved about 20 
debts on his credit report. He understands what he must do to establish and maintain 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
his financial responsibility. Applicant promised to continue to work with his counsel to 
resolve his SOR debts.3  
 
The Appeal Board explained that circumstances beyond one’s control can cause 
unresolved debt, and are not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant admitted 
responsibility for and took reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his SOR debts, 
establishing some good faith.4 He established and maintained contact with his creditors 
through his counsel.5 Applicant did not describe any financial counseling; however, 
there are clear indications the problem is being resolved and is under control. 
Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely to recur; and they do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His efforts are sufficient to fully 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.   
                                            
3 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old helicopter mechanic, who has worked continuously for 
a defense contractor for 18 years. Applicant’s supervisor, a coworker, and his deputy 
program manager lauded his work performance and character for integrity, diligence, 
responsibility, and reliability. Their statements support reinstatement of his security 
clearance. Applicant served in the Army from 1971 to 1992, and he honorably retired 
from active duty as a first sergeant for a special operations unit. He served in combat in 
the Republic of Vietnam for 11 ½ months and in Southwest Asia during Desert 
Shield/Storm. He deserves substantial credit for supporting the U.S. Government during 
his Army active-duty service for 21 years. Applicant earned numerous Army awards 
including the following: MSM-1; ARCOM-4; AAM-2; OSR-3; NDSM-2; NCO PMER-3; 
AFEM-1; Army GCM-5; Air Medal-3; VSM w/CS-1; VCM-1; VGCUC w/Palm-1; and 
SWASM with 2 BSS. He is sufficiently mature to understand and comply with his 
security responsibilities. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States, 
the DOD, and his employer.   
 
Applicant is credited for admitting responsibility for his delinquent debts. 
Applicant’s spouse’s mental illness caused her to obtain and abuse credit cards. Her 
misuse of credit was the cause of Applicant’s financial problems, which is a 
circumstance largely beyond his control. She is no longer allowed access to his bank 
accounts, and he is not cosigned on any credit cards with her. Applicant paid his 
counsel about $1,300 a month for 25 months to resolve his delinquent debts. He settled, 
paid, or otherwise resolved about 20 debts. The three remaining SOR debts are either 
resolved or in the process of resolution through his counsel’s actions. He has sufficient 
financial resources to resolve any remaining delinquent SOR debt. The Appeal Board 
has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination). There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person, and he understands what he needs to do to 
establish and maintain his financial responsibility. There is simply no reason not to trust 
him. Moreover, he established a “meaningful track record” of debt repayment. I am 
confident he will maintain his financial responsibility.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Withdrawn 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
