 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01101 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 13, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 
2014, scheduling the hearing for August 13, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on August 22, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2013. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married and he does not have children.1 
 
 Applicant attended college from 2010 until he graduated with an engineering 
degree in three years in May 2013. On about five occasions, from May 2012 to April 
2013, he used attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medication without a 
prescription to help him study for tests.2  
 
 Applicant listed his use of ADHD medication on his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in October 2013, and he fully discussed 
it during his background interview in December 2013. He has not used ADHD 
medication without a prescription or any illegal drugs since he graduated college. He 
has a good job with a bright future. He married in December 2013, and his wife does not 
use illegal drugs. He credibly stated that he will never take a prescription drug without a 
prescription in the future.3 
 
 Applicant volunteers in his church and in his community. A witness testified and 
Applicant submitted several letters praising his job performance, moral character, 
trustworthiness, honesty, loyalty, dependability, work ethic, responsibility, and integrity.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14, 18-20; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 14-15, 18, 20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 15-20, 24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 14-15, 21-23; AE A-D. 
 
3 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;5 and 
 
                                                          
5 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
4 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant possessed and used a controlled substance without a valid 
prescription. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s drug use occurred while he was in college studying for examinations. 
He fully disclosed his drug use in his SF 86 and during his background interview. he 
realizes that such behavior is wrong and inconsistent with holding a security clearance. 
His wife does not use illegal drugs, and he has a career with a bright future. He clearly, 
unequivocally, and credibly committed to remaining drug-free. I find that he 
demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence and that illegal drug use is unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
5 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant exhibited immature behavior and a disregard for the law when he used 
a controlled substance without a prescription. I am convinced that he has put his 
inappropriate and illegal behavior behind him and it will not recur.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
