 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00069 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 13, 2014, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 16, 2014, Applicant 
changed his request to a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 21, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 2014, scheduling the hearing for August 13, 2014. 
 
2 
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 21, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since December 2007. He is applying for a security clearance. He 
has an associate’s degree, and he is taking additional classes toward a bachelor’s 
degree. He is married with two children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges delinquent debts of $13,185 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and $2,578 (SOR ¶ 
1.b). Applicant admitted owing the two debts. The debts also appear on Applicant’s 
October 2013 credit report. 
 
 Applicant entered into a business venture with two individuals in 2006. He used 
his credit to pay some of the business expenses. The venture was unsuccessful, and he 
ended the relationship in 2007. He also had periods of unemployment before he was 
hired by his current employer in December 2007. He indicated that he “overspent” and 
“was living well beyond [his] means prior to being laid off in 2006.” He was unable to 
pay all his bills, and several debts became delinquent.2 
 
 Applicant paid several debts after he obtained his current job. In about 2008 after 
a bad experience with a creditor, as discussed below, Applicant decided to concentrate 
on paying new bills and that he would “leave all [his] old debts alone and in the past.” In 
about 2010, he paid more debts, but he never paid the two debts alleged in the SOR. 
He spoke to a mortgage loan officer who told him that his credit rating would improve if 
he did nothing about the debts and let them fall off his credit report after seven years. 
Applicant decided to follow that advice.3 
 
 Applicant accrued the $13,185 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a through 
personal purchases such as musical equipment and traveling. He also used the credit 
card for his business. His October 2013 credit report shows the account was opened in 
June 2006, and it lists a date of last action of March 2008. The debt is not listed on 
credit reports from April 2014 and August 2014. Applicant stated that he attempted to 
settle the debt, but the collection company handling the debt wanted a large lump-sum 
payment. Applicant initially indicated that he did not intend to pay the debt. At his 
hearing, he indicated he was “50-50” on whether he would pay the debt.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 38, 40, 46; GE 1; AE F. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 19, 32-36, 42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE H. 
 
4 Tr. at 32, 41-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
 
3 
 
 The $2,578 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was for the lease of a credit card machine 
for the failed business venture. Applicant stated one of the individuals applied for the 
lease of the machine, but he had a poor credit rating, so Applicant submitted a back-up 
application. Applicant stated that he was told that the individual’s application was 
accepted. The individuals kept the credit card machine after Applicant left the business. 
Applicant received notices from the credit card machine company after he was no 
longer with the business. He contacted the company and told them that he was not 
liable for the machine, but the company threatened to sue him. He made several 
payments to the company but stopped after the company made an unauthorized 
withdrawal from his account. He does not intend to pay the debt. The debt is listed on 
the October 2013 credit report with a date of last action of September 2007. It is not 
listed on the credit reports from April 2014 and August 2014.5 
 
 Applicant’s current credit reports do not list any derogatory information. He has 
minimal savings, but he is able to pay his current bills without incurring any additional 
delinquent debts. He is current on the $527 monthly payments on the $27,245 car loan 
that was incurred in August 2013. He has not received financial counseling.6 
 
 Applicant submitted letters praising his job performance, trustworthiness, 
honesty, work ethic, responsibility, patriotism, and integrity.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 19-38, 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 33, 37-40, 44-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE A-C, G. 
 
7 AE D, E. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts, and he was unable or unwilling to pay 
his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant accrued several debts when he was unemployed and when he was 
involved in a failed business venture. Those events may have been beyond his control, 
but Applicant also admitted that he “overspent” and “was living well beyond [his] means 
prior to being laid off in 2006.”  
 
 Applicant has a grievance with the credit card machine company. I am giving 
Applicant the benefit of the doubt in that regard and SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
 The $13,185 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is more problematic. 
Applicant used the credit card for business and personal expenses. He has worked for 
his current employer since December 2007. He paid several debts then he decided to 
“leave all [his] old debts alone and in the past.” He may have had a bad experience with 
the credit card machine company, but that does not justify ignoring a legitimate debt 
while he had the means to address it. Applicant’s plan to raise his credit score by 
waiting until the debts fell off his credit report was successful. However, that does not 
equate to responsible conduct. 
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
applicable. I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his work history. 
Applicant completed his goal of raising his credit score by waiting for debts to fall off his 
credit report. That does not justify his decision to disregard a valid debt while he had the 
financial means to resolve it. His conduct raises doubts about his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
