1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00167
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 14, 2014
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on May 6, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.)  On March 12, 2014, the Department
of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) concerning Applicant. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 21, 2014, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on May 19, 2014. This case was assigned to me on May 22, 2014. The Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 27, 2014. I
convened the hearing as scheduled on July 1, 2014. The Government offered
Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant
submitted Applicant Exhibits A through E, which were admitted without objection, called
one witness, and testified on his own behalf. Applicant asked that the record remain
2
open for the receipt of additional documents. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on July 10, 2014. Applicant timely submitted Applicant Exhibit F, which
was admitted without objection. The record closed on July 17, 2014. Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 51, and married with two children. He is employed by a defense
contractor, and seeks to retain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant
admitted all the allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph. Those admissions are
findings of fact. He also submitted additional information to support his request for a
security clearance.
The SOR lists six delinquent debts, totaling approximately $37,858 (SOR 1.c
through 1.h). This amount includes delinquent taxes in the amount of approximately
$16,000. The existence and amount of these debts is supported by credit reports dated
May 9, 2013; October 28, 2013; May 19, 2014; and June 30, 2014. (Government
Exhibits 4, 5, 6, and 7.) In addition, the SOR alleges that Applicant filed for Chapter 7
bankruptcy protection in 1996 and 2012 (SOR 1.a and 1.b).
According to Applicant, his current financial difficulties began in approximately
2008. At that time payments on Applicant’s variable rate mortgage, concerning a house
he bought in 2003, began to increase and he could not make the payments. The house
was foreclosed upon in 2009. At that time Applicant and his wife moved into a rental
house, where they have remained. During that time Applicant’s wife’s business also
failed, and eventually they had to use credit cards to pay bills. That is where the majority
of the debt delinquencies come from, other than the tax debt discussed below.
(Government Exhibit 2 at 5.; Tr. 27-33, 37-38.)  
1.a. Applicant admits that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1996. His
unsecured debts in the amount of $107,686 were discharged in August 1996.
(Government Exhibit 3.) According to Applicant this bankruptcy was primarily caused by
his being laid off at his employment, and thereby going through a loss of almost half his
yearly income when he got new employment for a year and a half. By the time his
original job recalled him the debt situation had deteriorated. (Tr. 33-37.) Based on the
time since this bankruptcy was filed, as well as the circumstances surrounding its filing,
this allegation has no current security significance. It is found for Applicant.
3
1.b. Applicant admits filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in August 2012.
This bankruptcy was voluntarily dismissed by Applicant in December 2012. According to
Applicant, the bankruptcy was dismissed because he failed the so-called means test.
This was because he made too much money for a Chapter 7 case and a more
appropriate vehicle was a Chapter 13. (Tr. 51-54.)
Regarding repayment of his debts after the dismissal of his Chapter 7, Applicant
testified:
So after that and after I failed the means test I went to see an attorney
after that to see how do you go about this. And when he was looking at
some of that debt he advised he said, well, these are all past the four year
statute of limitations, they really can’t come after you on it anyhow. If you
want to pay on them that’s up to you to call them and work out some type
of payment plan, which yes I plan on doing that. (Tr. 46-47.)
The current status of the debts alleged in the SOR is as follows:
1.c. Applicant admits that he is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
for delinquent taxes in the amount of approximately $16,000. The debt is due to the fact
that Applicant filed his taxes in a timely manner from 2009 through 2013, but insufficient
withholding was taken out of his paycheck and he couldn’t pay the taxes when due.
(Government Exhibit 2 at 21-27; Tr. 39-41.) Applicant finally began talking to the IRS
about repayment this year. He has been making payments of $350 a month since
February 2014. (Applicant Exhibits E and F at 3-5; Tr. 41-43.) This debt is being
resolved.
1.d. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a debt in the amount
of approximately $12,172. (Tr. 60.)
1.e. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for charged-off account in
the amount of $4,002. (Tr. 45-47.) Applicant has not made any payments on this debt
and has no current plans to pay this debt. It is not resolved.
1.f. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for charged-off account in
the amount of $8,355. Under extensive questioning Applicant eventually revealed that
he had been sued by a successor creditor. A judgment had been issued against
Applicant in the amount of approximately $12,000. Applicant had paid $3,500 towards
this debt in June 2014 and was being garnished in the amount of $1,000 a month
beginning in August 2014 to resolve the remainder of the debt.(Applicant Exhibit F at
3,7; Tr. 47-50, 61.) This debt is being resolved.
1.g. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for charged-off account in
the amount of $2,737. (Tr. 50.) Applicant has not made any payments on this debt and
has no current plans to pay this debt. It is not resolved.
4
1.h. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the
amount of approximately $2,869. (Tr. 51.) Applicant has not made any payments on this
debt and has no current plans to pay this debt. It is not resolved.
Regarding all of his past-due debts Applicant states that his “intent is to pay them
all, to contact them and pay them.” (Tr. 50.See Tr. 54, 59.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted two letters from co-workers, showing that he is a well-
regarded and respected employee. (Applicant Exhibits A and B.) His most recent
performance review showed that he “Achieves Expectations.” (Applicant Exhibit D.)
Applicant’s witness was a friend of five years who also works in the defense
industry, but in a different company than Applicant. (Tr. 64-73.) The witness describes
Applicant as a “trustworthy,” “honest,” and “hardworking” person. (Tr. 66.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
5
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has a considerable amount of debt that he has either been
unable or unwilling to pay for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(b)
6
states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Also, AG
¶ 20(d) states it can be mitigating where, “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” None of these mitigating
conditions apply to Applicant’s case.
Applicant=s financial difficulties have been in existence since at least 2009, if not
before. In 2012 he made an attempt to resolve his debts by means of a Chapter 7
bankruptcy, which would have discharged all but his tax debt. Applicant failed the
means test, and elected not to convert his case to a Chapter 13 wage-earner plan,
which would have repaid his unsecured creditors. Rather, if not for the SOR, Applicant
had decided not to repay any of his debts because they were old and appeared to be
beyond his state’s statute of limitations. 
He only began repaying the tax debt this year, which includes unpaid taxes for
2013, which were not alleged in the SOR, as well. The few monthly payments to date
have not established a sufficient track record of compliance to mitigate security
concerns, particularly since he has not paid his taxes in a timely fashion since 2008
despite regular employment. In addition, it has to be said that Applicant was not exactly
forthcoming with information during his testimony about allegation 1.f. It took extensive
questioning by Department Counsel to have Applicant grudgingly admit that he was
subject to a lawsuit about this debt, that a judgment had been entered against him, that
his pay was being garnished, and that he had taken a loan from his 401(k) to pay part of
this particular debt. While it is now being repaid, it is not through a good-faith or
voluntary effort at resolution by Applicant.
In conclusion, looking at Applicant’s entire financial situation at the present time,
the evidence does not support a finding that “there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control,” as is required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found
against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
7
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guideline F, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems for
several years, which have not been resolved. He has a history of not paying his debts,
and it is too soon to show that he is now trustworthy and reliable. Applicant’s conduct
with regards to his finances was not mitigated.
Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent and continuing. I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I also
cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); or that there is little to no likelihood of continuation or recurrence
(AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation. Accordingly, the evidence supports denying his request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
