 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-00371 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his troubled 
finances. His delinquent debts total over $200,000, with the majority of of his delinquent 
debts consisting of unpaid federal and state taxes. Although his current financial 
situation is partly due to the failure of his business, he did not submit documentation to 
prove that he has responsibly addressed his delinquent debts. He has not worked out a 
payment plan or made other arrangements to resolve his debts. He has yet to take 
control of his finances and it appears highly likely that his poor financial state, and the 
attendant security concerns raised by his poor finances, will continue for some time. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with DOD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on 
the written record (Answer). 
 
 
2 
 
 On May 19, 2014, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material (FORM) 
and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed findings of 
fact, argument, and seven documentary exhibits. Applicant submitted a response to the 
FORM (Response). With his Response, Applicant submitted four documentary exhibits. 
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 7 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – D, without objection, 
were admitted into evidence. On July 30, 2014, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, and making only those 
reasonable inferences therefrom, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is in his mid-sixties. He has been married for over 25 years and has 
three adult children. He is a carpenter by trade and, in 2000, started his own 
construction company. Between 2006 and 2008, Applicant’s construction company 
started having financial trouble and went out of business. Since his business closed, 
Applicant has been working different construction jobs including several positions as a 
federal contractor. He has suffered from periods of unemployment and 
underemployment since his company went out of business. He was hired by his current 
sponsor for a security clearance in June 2013.  
 
Applicant stopped paying his federal and state taxes after his business began 
having financial trouble. He admits to owing the IRS for unpaid federal taxes for tax 
years 2006 through 2012. His unpaid federal tax debt totals over $160,000. (SOR 1.l – 
1.r) In 2012, a judgment for over $24,000 was filed against him for unpaid state taxes 
for tax years 2006 through 2012. (SOR 1.a) Applicant’s 2013 federal tax return was 
intercepted to offset his federal tax debt.1 He did not submit evidence of a repayment 
plan. He also did not submit documentation of efforts to resolve his tax debts or 
reasonable basis upon which to dispute the tax debts. Applicant states that after his 
business failed he found himself financially unable to pay his tax obligations.2 
 
Applicant refinanced his home in an attempt to save his business and, 
subsequently, fell behind on his mortgage. (SOR 1.b) He submitted proof that his loan 
was recently modified, with a resulting reduction in his monthly mortgage payments.3 He 
did not submit evidence of making any payments per the terms of the modified 
mortgage agreement.  
 
In addition to Applicant’s delinquent mortgage and substantial tax debts, the SOR 
alleges nine collection accounts. Applicant admits these debts in collection status, 
except for a $177 debt referenced in SOR 1.j. Applicant claims he resolved this minor 
debt, but did not submit documentation to corroborate his claim. He admits that the 
                                                          
1 Ax. B. 
 
2 Answer. 
 
3 Ax. A. 
 
3 
 
remaining eight collection accounts, which total over $30,000 and includes an unpaid 
$62 debt, remain unresolved. (SOR 1.c – 1.i, 1.k)  
 
Applicant did not submit evidence of receiving financial or debt counseling. He 
states that his income is “50 to 60 percent less” than what he made when he owned his 
construction business. He further states that his “meager income" only allows him to pay 
his current living expenses and he is unable to “set-up a payment plan with anyone” to 
resolve his delinquent debts. He describes his current financial situation as living 
“paycheck to paycheck.”4 
 
 Applicant disclosed his delinquent tax debts on his security clearance application 
(SCA).5 He submitted a letter from an officer in the U.S. military, who he has been 
acquainted with for the past 13 years. The witness writes that he is unaware of any 
issues regarding Applicant’s character that would pose a security threat.6 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
                                                          
4 Answer. 
 
5 Gx. 3. 
 
6 Ax. D. 
 
4 
 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.7 However, a judge must decide each case based on its 
own merits because there is no per se rule requiring disqualification.8 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.9 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7.10 Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
                                                          
7 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
8 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect 
and safeguard classified information). See also, ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (A judge’s predictive 
determination “is made by identifying and then evaluating behaviors or circumstances that have an 
articulable nexus to the ability or willingness to safeguard classified information.”). 
 
10 See also, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 4 (App. Bd. July 25, 2014) (“an adverse decision under the 
Directive is not a determination that the applicant is disloyal. Rather, such a decision signifies that the 
applicant has engaged in conduct or has otherwise experienced circumstances that raise questions about 
his or her judgment and reliability. Such questions, if not mitigated by the applicant, can impugn his or her 
fitness for access to national secrets.”). 
 
5 
 
The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are established through Applicant’s 
admissions and the other evidence submitted with the FORM, notably the SCA, credit 
reports, and public record documents. See Gx. 2 – 6. Applicant’s delinquent debts and, 
of particular significance, his unpaid tax debts raise the Guideline F concern and 
establish the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The mitigating conditions that are potentially relevant in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are numerous, substantial, and on-going. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Although Applicant’s financial situation can be traced back to the failure of his 
construction business, which was likely impacted by the general downturn in the 
economy at that time, his failure to pay his tax obligations were not a matter beyond his 
control. Moreover, notwithstanding the recent modification of his delinquent mortgage, 
Applicant has failed to act responsibly in addressing his longstanding debts in the six to 
eight years that have passed since his business closed. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence of receiving financial or debt counseling. He 
also did not present documentation of a meaningful track record of debt repayment or 
even a plan to resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant’s failure to provide substantial 
and credible evidence of financial reform leaves all the other mitigating conditions 
unavailable. Applicant has yet to take control of his finances and it appears highly likely 
that his delinquent debts, and the attendant security concerns raised by these debts, will 
continue into the foreseeable future.11 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).12  
 
 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s honesty in revealing his delinquent debts 
on his SCA, his favorable character reference, and that his current financial 
predicament is partly due to the recent economic recession that led to his business’s 
failure and subsequent unemployment and underemployment. Also, it appears that 
Applicant is starting to resolve his financial situation, as evidenced by his recent 
success in negotiating a modification of his mortgage. However, this and other favorable 
record evidence does not mitigate the security concerns raised by his debts and overall 
financial situation.13  
 
 The security concern raised by an individual with a substantial amount of 
delinquent debt extends beyond the concern that they might engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds to resolve their financial situation. The concern also requires a close 
examination of the circumstances that led the individual to accumulate delinquent debt 
to determine whether such circumstances indicate that the individual would also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in handling and safeguarding 
classified information.14  
 
                                                          
11 Security clearance adjudications are “not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a 
person’s security suitability,” where an applicant’s past history is the best indicator of future conduct. 
ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) [citing to Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529 (1988)].  
 
12 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (Favorable record evidence regarding an 
individual’s character, honesty, and reliability “may not be sufficient to mitigate a history of ongoing, 
significant delinquent debt.”). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 12-04554 at 3 (App. Bd. July 25, 2014); ISCR Case No. 13-00311 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 
24, 2014); ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. Bd. June 26, 2012).  
 
 
7 
 
As the true focus of the financial considerations security concern is an 
individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, an applicant is not required to be 
debt free or to pay off all their delinquent debts to mitigate the concern.15 Conversely, 
the resolution of all delinquent debt does not by itself necessarily mitigate the initial 
concern raised by the individual’s accumulation of delinquent debt.16 Instead, an 
individual must establish that their judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness meets the 
high standards required for those granted access to this nation’s secrets. Generally, an 
individual can meet this heavy burden by presenting credible and substantial evidence 
of true financial reform, such as through a demonstrated track record of meaningful debt 
repayment.17  
 
 In the present case, Applicant failed to meet his heavy burden of mitigating the 
security concerns raised by the substantial amount of delinquent debt that remains 
unaddressed and unresolved. Beyond the recent modification of his mortgage, 
Applicant presented no documentation that he has started to repay or otherwise resolve 
his delinquent debts.18 Applicant’s repeated and consistent failure to pay his federal and 
state taxes raises heightened concern about his suitability, because an individual with a 
history of failing to meet the obligation of all citizens to pay their taxes may similarly fail 
to discharge their security obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.r:         Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009).  
 
16 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13984 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2014) (notwithstanding payment of all SOR 
debts, denial of clearance upheld because long history of not paying debts and failure to establish true 
financial reform). 
 
17 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00504 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014) (denial of clearance reversed where 
individual submitted evidence of debt repayment of more than half of the SOR debts); ISCR Case No. 12-
04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (grant affirmed upon proof of clear evidence of financial reform). 
 
18 Even if I were to assume that Applicant resolved the $177 SOR debt and has started to pay his 
mortgage, he failed to meet his heavy burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by his long history 
of failing to pay his financial obligations. Of particular note in this respect is Applicant’s failure to address 
and remedy the minor debts alleged in the SOR, such as the $62 collection account referenced in 1.k. 
Applicant’s failure to address such minor debts severely undermines favorable evidence of fiscal reform. 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
