KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Mitigation under Guideline F does not require payment of all debts.  It does require
that the applicant remove concerns about his ot her reliability and trustworthiness raised by those
debts.  Applicant has demonstrated a track record of debt resolution, thereby showing the degree
of reliability and trustworthiness contemplated by Guideline F, despite a lack of cooroborating
evidence regarding the disposition of two remaining SOR debts.  The Judge’s adverse findings
are not sustainable.  Adverse decision reversed.   
CASENO: 14-00504.a1
DATE: 08/04/2014
DATE: August 4, 2014
In Re:
-------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00504
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Corey Williams, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 11, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On May 30, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a retired member of the U.S. military and seeks renewal of a clearance she held
on active duty.  She has worked for a Defense contractor since early 2010.  She became a widow in
March 2011.
The SOR alleges four delinquent credit card debts.  Applicant attributes her financial
problems to her difficulty in finding a good-paying job after graduating from college, caring for her
aging mother, and other unspecified unforseen circumstances.
Applicant entered into an agreement with a credit counseling company in order to resolve
her delinquent debts.  She paid off two of the debts alleged in the SOR (worth about $13,000), and
she paid two other debts that were not alleged.  However, she submitted no corroborating evidence
as to the resolution or status of the remaining two debts.  
Applicant provided no character references or employment records.  Her credit reports show
a large number of accounts that were delinquent but which are current or have been closed with a
zero balance.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that, if Applicant’s circumstances were as she claimed them to be, the
security concerns in her case would be mitigated.  He stated that her problems appear to be receding,
that her financial problems were affected by circumstances outside her control, “and she might
reasonably claim to have been responsible in addressing many debts not alleged in the SOR since
then, as well as the two SOR debts she resolved.”  Decision at 4.  He noted that Applicant had
received credit counseling.  He also stated that her resolution of the two SOR debts plus two others
demonstrates a good-faith effort to pay off her debts.   However, because she did not corroborate the
status of the remaining two SOR debts, he concluded that she had failed to meet her burden of
persuasion as to mitigation.  
Discussion
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913
F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the Government presents
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those
concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and
whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the
particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light
of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20,
2006).
The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2
¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, the Board will review
the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to
articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that she had not demonstrated mitigation of the
concerns raised by the SOR allegations.  She cites to evidence that her debts arose from
circumstances outside her control, such as expenses associated with caring for her mother, loss of
her husband, and  her difficulty in finding employment.  She also cites to evidence of her agreement
with the credit counseling company and the attendant debt resolution. She argues that she has shown
responsible action in regard to her debts and that her debts are being resolved. 
A meaningful track record of debt reform includes evidence that debts have actually been
paid off or resolved.  However, an applicant is not required to show that every debt in the SOR has
been paid.  Rather, an applicant is required to demonstrate that he or she has “established a plan to
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.”  ISCR
Case No. 07-06482 at 2 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  A Judge should consider the entirety of an
applicant’s financial circumstances in deciding whether his or her plan for debt reduction is credible.
There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment
of such debts one at a time . . . Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.
Id. a 2-3.
In short, mitigation under Guideline F does not require payment of all debts.  It does require that the
applicant remove concerns about his or her reliability and trustworthiness raised by those debts.
In the case before us, we note the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s problems were
affected by circumstances outside her control and that she could reasonably claim to have engaged
in responsible action.  This conclusion is consistent with the record that was before him.  This record
includes evidence that Applicant has entered into a credit counseling plan, has paid off four of the
six debts addressed by the plan, and has resolved many other delinquent debts not alleged in the
SOR.  Applicant has resolved about $13,000 of the SOR debts–more than half the total indebtedness
cited by the DoD.  Under the facts of this case, Applicant has demonstrated a track record of debt
resolution, thereby showing the degree of reliability and trustworthiness contemplated by Guideline
F, despite a lack of corroborating evidence regarding the disposition of the two remaining SOR
debts. 
Each case must be decided on its own merits.  In the one before us, we conclude that the
Judge’s adverse findings are not sustainable.  
Order
The Decision is Reversed.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
