 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-00236 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 24, 2013. On 
March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 14, 2014, 
and the case was assigned to me on May 22, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 27, 2014, scheduling the 
 
2 
 
hearing for July 11, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Department Counsel also 
submitted a demonstrative exhibit summarizing the evidence, which was attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Applicant testified, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) A and B, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until July 
21, 2014, to enable Applicant to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AX C 
and D, which were admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I extended the 
deadline for post-hearing submissions to August 4, 2014, and Applicant timely 
submitted AX E, which was admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
comments regarding AX C-E are attached to the record as HX II. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old armed security guard employed by a defense 
contractor. He did not complete high school, but he obtained a general educational 
development certificate in 1996 or 1997. (GX 4 at 2.) He attended college from January 
2000 to October 2001 and received an associate’s degree. After receiving his degree, 
he was unemployed until January 2003. He worked for a heating and air conditioning 
company from January 2003 to January 2004. He worked as a building superintendent 
from February 2004 to September 2008. He worked as an armed security guard from 
September 2008 to June 2013, when he began his current job. He has never held a 
security clearance. 
 
 Applicant married in December 2005. He and his wife have a 23-year-old son 
who was born before they married. He also has a 13-year-old step-daughter who was 
born during his wife’s relationship with another man before Applicant and she were 
married. (GX 4 at 5.) His son and step-daughter live with him and his wife. (Tr. 27.) His 
son pays the cable bill and electric bill for the home. (Tr. 38.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “No” to a question asking if, 
during the past seven years, he had any bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency. He did not disclose any of the debts alleged in the SOR, even though all the 
debts alleged in the SOR had been turned over to collection agencies before he 
submitted his SCA. (GX 1 at 32.) The evidence indicates that the student loan alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.g is included in SOR ¶ a, and the collection accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i pertain to the same cellphone account.  
 
 During a personal subject interview (PSI) on August 28, 2013, Applicant told the 
investigator that he owed about $7,173 in past-due rent and that he had an informal 
agreement with his landlord to perform extra janitorial duties in the apartment building in 
return for reducing the past-due rent by $200 per month. (GX 4 at 2.) The past-due rent 
is not alleged in the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
During his PSI, Applicant told the investigator that he did not disclose the student 
loan in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g, the credit card account in SOR ¶ 1.d, and the cellphone bill 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i because he had forgotten about them. (GX 4 at 7-8.) 
He told the investigator that he did not disclose the delinquent bill for satellite television 
service in SOR ¶ 1.b, because he did not discover it until August 2013, after he 
submitted his SCA. He explained that he obtained the satellite service for his sister-in-
law and was unaware that she was not making the payments for the service as she had 
agreed. (GX 4 at 7.)  
 
Applicant told the investigator that the cellphone account in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 
1.g, 1.h, and 1.i was obtained for himself, his nephew, and his cousin. He paid his share 
of the bill but the other users did not. When Applicant found out that the bill was 
delinquent, he paid $700 but could not afford to pay the debt in full. (GX 4 at 7-9.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he knew he had delinquent debts and he 
had received notices from collection agencies before he submitted his SCA. He testified 
that he thought he had answered “Yes” to the question about debts turned over to 
collection companies, but that he was rushing to complete the questionnaire and had to 
redo parts of the questionnaire so many times that he inadvertently answered “No” to 
the question. He testified that he did not print out a copy of his questionnaire and check 
it for errors before submitting it. (Tr. 47-49.) 
 
 In March 24, 2014, the day after Applicant answered the SOR, Applicant 
contacted a debt-management company, and he signed a contract with the company on 
July 11, 2014, the day of his hearing. The plan includes all the debts in the SOR. His 
debt-management plan provides for monthly payments of $236, beginning on July 21, 
2014. (AX A; AX C.) He has another student loan not alleged in the SOR, on which he is 
paying $114 per month by automatic deduction from his bank account. (Tr. 38.) 
Applicant has been in a no-pay status since April 28, 2014, and unable to make any 
payments. When he was in a pay status, his take-home pay every two weeks was about 
$1,600. (Tr. 37.) He testified that his debt-management plan is “on standby.” (Tr. 30.) 
 
 A friend and neighbor of Applicant for more than 20 years submitted a letter on 
his behalf, describing him as dependable, hardworking, responsible, honest, respectful, 
and trustworthy. Applicant confided in him about the mistakes he has made by 
cosigning for family members, his intent to obtain financial counseling, his quest for a 
better-paying job, and his desire to pay off his delinquent debts. (Answer to SOR, 
Enclosure 1.)  
 
A senior credit manager for a large corporation has known Applicant for almost 
20 years, and she described Applicant’s concern for his neighborhood as a pre-
teenager, earning a reputation as the “neighborhood watch kid.” She has watched him 
grow into being a responsible father and husband, and she has been impressed by his 
continuing interest in contributing to his community. (AX D.)  
 
 
4 
 
A senior manager from Applicant’s previous company, where Applicant was an 
armed guard transporting and protecting cash, jewelry, artwork, and bonds, described 
him as dependable, hardworking, honest, punctual, and well-liked by his coworkers. (AX 
B.) Applicant’s current supervisor has “great respect” for him and states, “He has always 
displayed a high degree of integrity, responsibility, [and] trustworthiness since the day 
he started to work here.” (Answer to SOR, Enclosure 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts. The delinquent student loan in SOR ¶ 
1.a includes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. The delinquent cellphone account alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c is duplicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. When the same conduct is alleged 
more than once in the SOR under the same guideline, the duplicative allegations should 
be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.i for 
Applicant. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish four 
delinquent debts: a student loan for $1,075, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g; the satellite 
 
6 
 
service account for $346, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b; a cellphone account for $2,209, alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i; and a credit card account for $440, alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.d. His delinquent debts establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, 
numerous, and did not occur under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s delinquent debts were caused by 
periods of unemployment and underemployment and the failure of family members to 
pay debts for which Applicant was a cosigner or jointly liable. However, he has not 
acted responsibly. He started his current job over a year ago and was drawing full pay, 
but he took no significant action to resolve his debts until after he responded to the SOR 
in late March 2014.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. Applicant’s receipt of financial counseling and 
enrollment in a debt management plan are steps in the right direction. However, 
because he is not able to start making payments under the plan and has not established 
a track record of financial responsibility, the second prong of this mitigating condition is 
not established. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. A “good-faith effort” means acting in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR 
Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past 
irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for 
a security clearance. Even though Applicant has worked for his current employer since 
 
7 
 
June 2013, he took no meaningful action to resolve the debts alleged in the SOR until 
after he answered it in March 2014, and he did not sign the contract with the debt-
management company until the day of his hearing. Although he now has a plan for 
resolving his debts, he has been unable to initiate payments under the plan. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA by answering “No” 
to a question whether he had any debts or bills turned over to a collection agency within 
the last seven years. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business experience are 
relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security 
clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 
2010). 
 
 Although Applicant had difficulty understanding some of the questions on the 
SCA, the question at issue was simple, and he has not claimed at any time that he did 
not understand it. During his PSI, he told the investigator that he had forgotten about the 
debts. At the hearing he admitted that he knew about his delinquent debts and had 
received notices from collection agencies before submitting his SCA. He claimed that he 
inadvertently changed a “Yes” to a “No” while attempting to correct his other mistakes 
on the SCA. He has not explained his contradictory explanations for answering “No” to 
the question. His contradictory explanations are not plausible or credible. I conclude that 
AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 
8 
 
 Two mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant acknowledged during the PSI that he 
should have disclosed the delinquent debt for satellite service, but he claimed that he 
did not discover this debt until after he submitted his SCA. He falsely told the 
investigator that he had forgotten about the student loan in SOR ¶ 1.a; the cellphone 
account in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1., and 1.i; and the credit card account in SOR ¶ 1.d.  
 
 AGA ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s falsification of his SCA was not minor, 
because it undermined the integrity of the security clearance process. It was recent 
because it pertained to his current SCA. It was not infrequent because he compounded 
his false statement on his SCA by giving false explanations during the PSI and at the 
hearing. His falsification did not occur under unique circumstances making it unlikely to 
recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
9 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from his unemployment, underemployment, 
financial naïveté, and misguided generosity to untrustworthy family members. He has 
obtained financial counseling and has a plan to resolve his debts, but he cannot execute 
his plan without adequate income. His lack of candor during the security clearance 
process raises serious doubts about his reliability and trustworthiness.1 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.i:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s delinquent rent and his false statements to the investigator during his PSI were not alleged in 
the SOR. Thus, they cannot be an independent basis for denying his application. However, conduct not 
alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular 
adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of 
a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered his 
delinquent rent and lack of candor during his PSI for these limited purposes. 
 
