 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01201 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lawrence Miller, Esq. 
 
 
August 29, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to four creditors in the approximate amount of $16,757. He has acted 
responsibly with respect to his debts by resolving all but one of his delinquencies. He 
contested the remaining debt and it no longer appears on his credit report. Additionally, 
security concerns were raised because Applicant failed to disclose his debts and 
judgments relating to two of those debts on his electronic Security Clearance 
Application (e-QIP). The omissions were unintentional. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On May 1, 2014, the 
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, Financial Considerations and E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 29, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 14, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 
14, 2014, scheduling the hearing for August 7, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE I) and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
6. GE 1 through 3 were admitted without objection. GE 4 through 6 were admitted 
despite Applicant’s objections to staleness and lack of authentication. (Tr. 28-34.) 
Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. The record was left open 
for Applicant to submit additional exhibits and on August 20, 2014, Applicant presented 
one additional exhibit marked AE G. Department Counsel had no objections to AE G 
and it was admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on August 18, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer since 2013. He served in the Navy from 2000 to 2010 and achieved the 
rate of E-5. He held a security clearance in the Navy, without incident. He is separated 
from his wife and has custody of their two children. He filed for divorce in 2010, but a 
final decree has not yet been issued. (GE 1; Tr. 42-45.)  
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be indebted four creditors in the 
approximate amount of $16,757. Applicant denied the debts listed in subparagraphs 
1.a, 1.b, and 1.c of the SOR. He admitted the debt in subparagraph 1.d, with 
explanations. He also denied falsifying his e-QIP by omitting his debts and judgments 
as alleged in subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b. His debts are found in the credit reports 
entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a judgment filed against him in March 2007 in the 
amount of $2,825, as alleged in subparagraph 1.a. This debt was the result of a 
cleaning fee incurred when he moved out of the apartment he occupied with his wife, 
upon their separation. He provided an Acknowledgment of Satisfaction of Judgment 
showing that this debt was satisfied in full on December 3, 2012. He testified that he 
could not afford to repay this debt until then. This debt is resolved. (AE A; AE F; Tr. 46-
47, 69-71.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a judgment filed against him by a credit union in the 
amount of $11,175, as alleged in subparagraph 1.b. Applicant became liable on this 
debt as a co-signer when his wife defaulted on a car loan after their separation. The 
vehicle was repossessed and Applicant was held liable for the remainder due on the 
loan. Applicant began making $300 per month payments on this judgment in 2008. He 
satisfied this judgment in full on November 20, 2012. He presented an Acknowledgment 
 
3 
 
of Satisfaction of Judgment that shows this debt is resolved. (AE B; AE F; Tr. 50-51, 71-
72.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a medical debt in the approximate amount of $303 as 
alleged in subparagraph 1.c. He was unaware of this debt until the investigative agent 
who interviewed him regarding his security clearance application asked him about the 
delinquency. He contacted the creditor and satisfied the debt on May 27, 2014. He 
provided a receipt from the creditor to show this debt is resolved. (AE C; AE F; Tr. 52-
55, 73-74.) 
 
 Applicant has been in ongoing communications with a cell phone company 
regarding his $2,454 debt stated in subparagraph 1.d. This debt was incurred when he 
was deployed in 2009. Prior to his deployment, he negotiated an international calling 
plan with his cellular company. When he returned, he discovered the cellular company 
had significantly over-billed him. He testified he hired a credit repair service to contest 
his debts on his behalf because he wanted to increase his credit score. This debt no 
longer appears on his two most recent credit reports, however he is willing to repay this 
debt. Applicant has acted responsibly with respect to this debt. (GE 5; GE 6; AE F; Tr, 
55-59, 75.) 
 
 Personal Conduct security concerns arose out of Applicant’s failure to disclose 
his judgments identified in subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b, and his failure to disclose debts 
over 120 days delinquent as identified in subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d, on his October 
2, 2013 e-QIP. Section 26 of the e-QIP asked have any of the following happened to 
you, “In the past seven (7) years, you had a judgment entered against you. (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you 
were a cosigner or guarantor.)”; and, “In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 
120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations 
for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosigner or 
guarantor.)” Applicant answered the sections that included both of these questions, 
“No.” He explained that he misread or misunderstood the questions, because he 
thought that they only were inquiring about delinquent debt. He had paid off his 
judgments and disputed his debt through the credit repair service prior to completing the 
e-QIP, and did not realize he needed to list them. He was unaware of the medical debt 
when he completed the e-QIP. In light of his past disclosure to the government 
concerning the judgment in 1.b while in the Navy, and his disclosure of a prior arrest on 
his e-QIP, his testimony was credible. He did not intentionally answer these questions 
incorrectly. (AE F; Tr. 58-61, 79-81.) 
 
  Applicant presented two letters of recommendation from his supervisor and a co-
worker. They recognized Applicant for his outstanding performance at work. His 
supervisor also testified on Applicant’s behalf. His supervisor noted Applicant has a 
strong work ethic and is a valued employee. Applicant’s DD-214 reflects that he was 
awarded the National Defense Service Medal, the Global War on Terrorism Medal, the 
Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, three Good Conduct Medals, the Navy “E” Ribbon, 
Navy Unit Commendation, Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, the Meritorious Unit 
 
4 
 
Commendation, and three Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals, during his 
military service. (AE D; AE E; AE G; Tr. 34-44, 66.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant became delinquent on four financial obligations totaling $16,757 in 
2007 to 2009, after his separation from his wife. He was unable to resolve the 
judgments until 2012. He satisfied the medical debt in 2014. The Government 
established that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations from 2007 to 
2014. The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial obligations. Two are applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”1 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”2  
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
2 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s two judgments, which represent the majority of his debt, arose out 
unique situations as a result of his separation from his wife. He has filed for divorce. 
Similarly, the cellular phone bill resulted from international charges incurred during a 
deployment. Applicant is no longer in the Navy and is unlikely to be deployed. He now 
monitors his credit and is working to increase his credit score. His financial difficulties 
are unlikely to occur again and they do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant has acted responsibly and made a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors by contacting his creditors identified in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. He 
satisfied these three debts. He disputed his remaining account in good faith, and it has 
been removed from his credit report. AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to identify his SOR-listed judgments and debts on his e-QIP. 
However, his omission was not intentional. He misunderstood the questions and 
thought they only were asking about delinquencies. He knew of no delinquencies at the 
time he completed his e-QIP. Evidence reflects that he had previously provided details 
about one of his judgments during a previous security clearance investigation while he 
was in the Navy. He also disclosed a prior arrest that he was highly embarrassed about. 
His testimony that he unintentionally omitted his judgments and debts was credible and 
does not raise a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is well respected by his supervisor and colleague. He performs well at his job. 
He served in the Navy, honorably, for 10 years. He has never had a security violation, 
though he has held a clearance in the past. His financial difficulties are largely 
attributable to his marital separation. He has acted responsibly by repaying his debts 
and enlisting the aid of a credit repair service. There is little likelihood of recurrence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
