 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00143 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 13, 2014 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns that arose out of his 
infrequent recreational drug use from 2001 to 2011. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP). On March 11, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on May 5, 2014 and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 27, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on June 30, 2014, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 29, 2014. The 
Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called two 
witnesses. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has worked 
for the government contractor for less than a year. Prior to his job with the government 
contractor, Applicant was a graduate student and worked as a research assistant in his 
chosen career field. This is the first time he has applied for a security clearance. He 
graduated with a doctoral degree in June 2014. He is single and has no children. (GE 1; 
GE 2; Tr. 35-38, 48, 58.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that between 2001 and 2011, Applicant infrequently used drugs 
to include: marijuana about three times a year in 2001-2002, and once a year in 2005, 
2006, and 2010; the prescription drug Adderall (without a prescription) nine times 
between 2003 and 2009; a hallucinogenic drink named Ayahuasca while in a foreign 
country one time in 2008; and hallucinogenic mushrooms three-to-four times between 
2002 to 2003 and once in 2011. In his e-QIP, Answer, and during his testimony, 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations contained in the SOR pertaining to his drug use. 
(GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 35-62; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s drug use was largely recreational in nature and occurred infrequently 
during his extended undergraduate and graduate education. He found himself giving in 
to peer pressure from former friends who encouraged him to use illegal substances. He 
also acknowledged using the prescription drug Adderall, without a prescription, in order 
to help him study long hours during his schooling. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 30-35, 38-48, 51-55, 
62.) 
 
 He recognizes the poor judgment of his past illegal drug use. In fact, immediately 
after ingesting the mushrooms in 2011, he realized the error of his ways and confessed 
his drug use to his brother who chastised him on his behavior. Applicant vowed to never 
use illegal substances or misuse prescription drugs again, at that time. He recognized 
that he made a serious mistake and should not use drugs again. He has been 
successful in maintaining that promise for nearly three years. He has been extremely 
forthright in offering details about his drug use on his e-QIP, in his personal subject 
interview, in his Answer, and in his testimony. He has matured since his last drug use in 
2011. He is no longer a student, but prides himself on being a professional. He no 
longer associates with any drug-using friends. He signed a statement of intent in which 
he pledged “never to use any illegal drug or misuse any legal drug at any point in the 
future.” (GE 2; Tr. 30-34, 59, 61-62, 64.)  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by his manager 
and a friend of 13 years, both of whom testified on Applicant’s behalf. Applicant is 
known by his manager to be extremely conscientious, reliable and trustworthy. He rates 
him highly among all employees. His manager also testified that all employees are 
required to take a urinalysis when hired. He stated that Applicant would not have been 
hired had he failed the urinalysis. Applicant has been “truthful” with his employer about 
his past drug use. He has conducted himself with “consummate professionalism” and 
has a high degree of integrity. Additionally, letters of support from friends and relatives 
demonstrate that Applicant no longer has room for illegal substances in his life and has 
matured into a serious professional man. (AE C; Tr. 65-84.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
4 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG 
¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d). Applicant possessed and used 
marijuana, Ayahuasca, and hallucinogenic mushrooms infrequently over a ten-year 
period. He also occasionally misused the prescription drug Adderall. The facts 
established through the Government’s evidence and through Applicant’s admissions 
raise security concerns under both of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
 
5 
 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use and misuse of a prescription drug occurred while 
Applicant was a student. It happened infrequently, in situations of peer pressure. In 
2011, after Applicant’s last drug use, he recognized that he needed to stop using illegal 
substances. He has matured into a successful, ethical, and hard-working professional in 
the past few years. Future drug use is unlikely. His past drug-use casts no doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is mitigating. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated sufficient intent not to use any illegal drugs or 
misuse prescription drugs in the future. He has disassociated from drug-using friends. 
He is no longer a student, and surrounds himself with like-minded professional 
acquaintances that do not use illegal substances. Thus, he has changed his 
environment. He has abstained from the use of illegal substances for almost three 
years. He signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. Applicant’s current reputation for honesty and ethical behavior, coupled with 
his candor concerning his past drug use, add weight to his commitment to abstain from 
illegal drug use. Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
Government’s concerns under AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While Applicant’s illegal drug 
use occurred over a ten-year span, it was infrequent and largely situational due to the 
pressures of peers and the rigorous academic challenges he faced. He was immature at 
the time and did not recognize the seriousness of his actions. He has now matured. He 
has not used illegal substances for nearly three years after coming to the revelation that 
 
6 
 
there was no room for illegal substances in his future professional life. His changes are 
permanent and the likelihood of recurrence is extremely low. Applicant is highly 
respected by those who know him. He has a reputation for honestly and 
trustworthiness. He successfully passed his employer’s required urinalysis test. The 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant should be 
granted a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
