 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-00275 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) contains ten allegations, nine of which 
are delinquent debts, totaling $16,091. The tenth allegation references his 2005 Chapter 
7 bankruptcy. Applicant paid, settled, or otherwise resolved all of his debts. Financial 
considerations are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 26, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On March 
7, 2014,1 the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
                                            
1
 The SOR issue date was incorrectly listed as March 7, 2013 versus March 7, 2014. Without 
objection from either party, I modified the date to March 7, 2014. (Tr. 9-10.) 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On March 7, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 22, 2014, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On May 20, 2014, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On May 23, 2014, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for June 26, 
2014. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant called one witness, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through L, which were received into evidence without objection.  
 
 I held the record open until July 11, 2014, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE M, which was received 
into evidence without objection. On August 15, 2014, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i and admitted 
SOR ¶ 1.j., with explanations. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.   
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old mechanical technician, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since January 2010. He seeks a secret security clearance, which is 
a condition of his continued employment. Applicant held an interim secret security 
clearance from October 2013 to March 2014. (Tr. 19-23, GE 1.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1982. He did not pursue higher 
education or serve in the U.S. armed forces. (Tr. 27, GE 1.) Applicant had a previous 
marriage from June 1984 to May 1987 that ended by divorce. He remarried in October 
1991, and has a 22-year-old daughter with his second wife. Applicant’s daughter is in 
her senior year of college and is dependent on Applicant for support. (Tr. 23-26.) His 
wife is employed as a general manager of a convenience store. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains ten allegations, nine of which are delinquent debts, 
totaling $16,091. The tenth allegation states that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
                                            
2
Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
October 2005 and was awarded a discharge in February 2006. The ten allegations are 
substantiated by his October 2013 credit report, Chapter 7 Bankruptcy and Discharge 
Order, SOR answers, November 5, 2013 Office of Personnel Management Personal 
Subject Interview (OPM PSI), and hearing statements. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.j, GE 2, GE 3, 
GE 4.) Below is a summary of Applicant’s SOR debts and their current status. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Charged-off account in the amount of $5,791. In 1996, Applicant 
took out a home improvement loan for $10,000. The account was assumed by a second 
creditor in interest and was sent to collections in 2007 when Applicant was unable to 
make payments. In September 2013, Applicant contacted the creditor and was informed 
that the account was charged off. In 2011, the creditor issued Applicant a Form 1099 for 
$12,782 and reported this as income to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). He 
resolved his tax arrearage with the IRS by payments and through recoupment of a tax 
refund. Debt resolved. (Tr. 49-57, SOR answer, GE 1, GE 2, GE 4, AE A, AE K, AE L, 
AE M.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Charged-off loan account in the amount of $2,294. In 2007, 
Applicant took out a loan to purchase a tanning bed for his wife. In April 2014, Applicant 
paid the account in full. Debt resolved. (Tr. 57-59, SOR answer, GE 4, AE B, AE K, AE 
L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $1,254. In 2007, 
Applicant opened this account and testified he used it for living expenses. In March 
2004, Applicant settled and paid this account for the lesser amount of $500. Debt 
resolved. (Tr. 59-60, SOR answer, GE 4, AE C, AE K, AE L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Charged-off gas credit card account in the amount of $2,017. This 
amount was discharged in Applicant’s 2006 bankruptcy and incorrectly included in his 
credit report. Applicant submitted ample documentation substantiating that this debt was 
discharged by bankruptcy. Debt resolved. (Tr. 60, SOR answer, GE 3, GE 4, AE D, AE 
K, AE L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Collection account for clothing credit card in the amount of $1,137. 
In March 2014, Applicant settled and paid this account for the lesser amount of $595. 
Debt resolved. (Tr. 60-61, SOR answer, GE 4, AE C, AE E, AE K, AE L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Collection account for women’s clothing credit card in the amount of 
$1,055. In March 2014, Applicant settled and paid this account for the lesser amount of 
$551. Debt resolved. (Tr. 60-62, SOR answer, GE 4, AE C, AE F, AE K, AE L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – Collection account for clothing credit card in the amount of $874. In 
March 2014, Applicant settled and paid this account for the lesser amount of $457. Debt 
resolved. (Tr. 60-62, SOR answer, GE 4, AE C, AE G, AE K, AE L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – Collection account for women’s clothing credit card in the amount of 
$852. In March 2014, Applicant settled and paid this account for the lesser amount of 
$445. Debt resolved. (Tr. 60-62, SOR answer, GE 4, AE C, AE H, AE K, AE L.) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶ 1.i – Collection account for clothing credit card in the amount of $817. In 
March 2014, Applicant settled and paid this account for the lesser amount of $427. Debt 
resolved. (Tr. 60-62, SOR answer, GE 4, AE C, AE I, AE K, AE L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j – In October 2005 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition and 
was awarded a discharge in February 2006. Applicant attributes his pre-bankruptcy 
financial problems to his wife losing her job post-9/11 and for several years experienced 
difficulty securing a steady job. (Tr. 40-41.) 
 
Applicant testified that his wife contacted each of the creditors periodically to 
work out payment plans; however, given their limited funds, they were unable to resolve 
these debts until recently. (Tr. 49-62.) Applicant was able to pay off his debts through a 
combination of factors to include working substantial overtime and downsizing housing 
costs. (Tr. 62-63.) 
 
Applicant experienced two periods of unemployment from February 2009 to 
March 2009 and from December 2009 to January 2010. Before being unemployed in 
February 2009, he made a cross-country move to accept what he thought was a better 
job in January 2008 and incurred unreimbursed and unanticipated moving costs. He did, 
however, accept responsibility for neglecting his finances post-2006 bankruptcy and not 
being more aggressive in monitoring them. (GE 1, GE 2, Tr. 29-40.) 
 
Applicant testified that he consulted with a credit counselor in 2010, but was 
unable to make significant headway due to lack of funds. (Tr. 41-42.) Post-hearing, 
Applicant submitted a comprehensive joint budget that reflects monthly income of 
$6,337, with an average net remainder of $1,900. Applicant’s budget reflects that he 
lives within his means and maintains a modest lifestyle. (Tr. 63-67, GE 4, AE M.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided three very favorable reference letters from his landlord, facility 
security officer and supervisor. Their letters attest to Applicant’s good character, 
trustworthiness, diligence, responsibility, and contributions to his employer and 
community. (AE J.) Applicant’s coworker (CW) testified on his behalf. He has known 
Applicant for 4 ½ years and maintains daily contact with him. CW stated that Applicant 
was dependable, knowledgeable, honest, and makes a significant contribution at work. 
CW recommended that Applicant be granted a security clearance. (Tr. 81-86.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted). 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his OPM PSI, 
his SOR answer, his bankruptcy filing, and his statement at his hearing. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
            Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants partial application of AG ¶ 
20(b). Applicant’s two short periods of unemployment in 2009 and 2010 no doubt 
caused an interruption in his income stream; however, too much time has elapsed since 
his unemployment to receive full credit. His financial problems were generated, in part, 
by circumstances beyond his control. Applicant acted responsibly by remaining in 
contact with his creditors; however, he did not have the money to pay them. When he 
did acquire the money, albeit several years past the due date, he paid or settled all of 
his accounts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. Applicant consulted with a credit counselor in 
2010, but did not have the money to pay his creditors. Four years later when he did 
have the money, he was able to follow through with the advice he received from credit 
counseling. His budget reflects he is living within his means and has regained financial 
responsibility.  
 
Full mitigation is warranted under AG ¶ 20(d).3 There are clear indications that 
his financial problems are resolved. All of Applicant’s debts are paid or settled. The debt 
                                            
 
3
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
in SOR ¶ 1.d was discharged in his 2006 bankruptcy. Furthermore, his 2006 bankruptcy 
is of limited security significance given the time elapsed and the fact that Applicant has 
regained financial responsibility. AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. Applicant did not provide 
documentation showing he disputed any of his delinquent SOR debts.    
 
In sum, Applicant has taken reasonable actions to resolve his delinquent debts 
and maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. Assuming, financial considerations concerns 
are not mitigated under AG ¶ 20, security concerns are mitigated under the whole-
person concept, infra.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old mechanical technician, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2010. He is sufficiently mature to understand and comply with 
his security responsibilities. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States 
and his employer. Applicant’s financial situation was adversely affected by 
unreimbursed moving costs, two briefs periods of brief unemployment, and not being 
more attentive to his financial situation. I give Applicant substantial credit for admitting 
responsibility for his delinquent debts in his e-QIP, OPM PSI, responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, SOR response, and at his hearing.  
 
Even though Applicant lacked the financial resources to pay his SOR debts when 
due, he made numerous other payments and maintained his rent, utilities, and taxes in 
current status. Applicant’s character letters and witness testimony attest to his good 
character for trustworthiness, diligence, responsibility, and conscientious, detail-oriented 
contributions to his employer and community. He is an intelligent person, and he 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
understands how to budget and what he needs to do to maintain his financial 
responsibility.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
