                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-01830
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 17, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 13, 2012.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On August 27, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992 (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on September 17, 2015, and elected
to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department
Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on
or about November 3, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on November 10, 2015.
Applicant was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation
within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant did not submit a reply to the FORM.  This case was
assigned to the undersigned on March 2, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 57 years old, and is divorced.  He obtained a GED in 1976.  He is
employed for a defense contractor as a driver. He is seeking to obtain a security
clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admitted allegation 1.a., and denied allegations 1.b., and 1.c. under
this guideline.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated September 6, 2012; and February
5, 2015, which includes information from all three credit reporting agencies, indicates
that Applicant is indebted to the state for two state tax liens totaling approximately
$5,000, listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)       
Applicant failed to file his Federal and state tax income tax returns for tax years
2010 and 2011.  Two state tax liens were entered against him in 2013, one in the
amount of $4,798, the other in the amount of $133.      
Applicant began working for his current employer in October 2010.  He also
mentioned that he went through a divorce in 2010, and although his ex-wife was to pay
half of the expenses for the children, among other requirements, she failed to do so.
She was diagnosed with cancer and passed away.  He claims that this is a factor as to
why he has incurred tax problems.  He failed to explained why this impacted his tax
liability.  He states that he has spent a significant amount of legal fees in an effort to
resolve his tax issues.  He attributes the fact that he has been living and working in
remote areas, sometimes 50 to 80 hours per week, with little or no phone or internet
service.  He has had no one to go thorough his paperwork.  Applicant believes that he
has met and satisfied his tax liabilities to the state.
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant fails to address whether he has now filed the
aforementioned income tax returns, as the record remains void of these documents.
Although he claims that he had paid the state tax liens, he fails to provide any
documentary evidence to show that he had resolved these debts.   
Other than his statements, there is no evidence in the record to corroborate  that
Applicant has done anything to address the issues of concern in the SOR.  Based upon
the evidence presented, the allegations in the SOR remain unaddressed by the
Applicant.  
3
 POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and
19.(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required 
or the fraudulent filing of the same.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
4
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
h. the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.  Because of the scope and
5
nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.
The evidence presented shows that Applicant failed to file his income tax returns
for tax years 2010 and 1011.  He also incurred two state tax liens for back taxes owed.
He states that his divorce, his long work hours on the job, and its remote locations kept
him from resolving his tax problems.  He has not provided sufficient information about
his past circumstances to invoke any of the mitigation factors.  Furthermore, he has not
provided any documents to prove that he has filed the income tax returns in question or
paid the outstanding tax liens.  Without compelling documentation showing that
Applicant has filed the income tax returns in question and either paid off or made
financial arrangements to meet his past-due financial obligations, he has not shown the
requisite good judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness that is necessary in order to be
eligible for access to classified information. 
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has not met his burden
of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  He does not have a concrete
understanding of his financial responsibilities and has not sufficiently addressed the
allegations set forth in the SOR.  Thus, it cannot be said that he has made a good-faith
effort to resolve his past-due indebtedness.  He has not shown that he is or has been
reasonably, responsibly, or prudently addressing his financial situation.  Thus, Applicant
has not demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs.  He must
demonstrate a history and pattern of financial responsibility, including filing and paying
his taxes.  Considering all of the evidence, Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations; and 19.(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.  Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his delinquent debts or
file his income taxes.  In fact, he has shown that he is not financially responsible.
Accordingly, I find against Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and failure to file his income tax returns,
and the effects that it can have on his ability to safeguard classified information.  On
6
balance, it is concluded that Applicant has failed to overcome the Government's case
opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a
finding against Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  Against Applicant.
    Subpara.    1.a. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.b. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.c. Against Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
