1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 12-04710 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties due to circumstances beyond his 
control, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly. His one-time misuse of an 
employer-issued credit card for personal use in 2011 was minor and is mitigated by 
time. He did not repeatedly falsify to his employer the circumstances surrounding the 
misuse of his credit card. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on November 15, 
2015. On December 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 2, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 
14, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on May 27, 2016. On June 30, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for July 26, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on August 3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$37,802. These delinquent debts include credit-card accounts and medical bills. In his 
Answer, Applicant admits 11 of the allegations. He denies SOR ¶ 2.j, stating it is paid. 
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that in 2011, Applicant misused his employer-
issued credit card and repeatedly made false statements to his employer regarding the 
use of and status of the credit card. Applicant admitted this allegation, however, he 
qualified that admission by stating that he did not make any false statements. The 
delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) from July 
2016, November 2015, and July 2011. (AX A; GX 3; GX 4.)  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old senior field technician II currently employed by a 
defense contractor since 2013. He was first employed as a federal contractor in 2006 
after graduating from high school. He held a clearance from November 2007 until about 
February 2014, when his clearance was administratively terminated following his being 
laid off from his job. He and his first wife married in 2008 and divorced in 2010. He 
married his current wife in August 2014, and they have a three-year-old daughter. (GX 
1.)  
 
Applicant’s wife left him and they divorced in 2010. He remained responsible for 
all of the marital debt, which includes the credit-card debts alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant and his ex-wife used the credit cards to purchase home furnishings and lawn 
care equipment. (Tr. 48.) He also gave his ex-wife half of the money in his bank account 
as part of the divorce settlement. (GX 1; Tr. 24.) From 2010 until 2014, Applicant lived 
with his parents to reduce his expenses and prevent incurring of additional debt. (GX 1; 
Tr. 50.)  
Applicant paid the $2,231 owed for the credit-card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.j. (AX 
A; Tr. 27.) He is making monthly payments on the $10,434 credit-card debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2.b. (Tr. 26.) He consulted with a credit-consolidation company in 2011, but 
determined that company’s fees were too high for him to afford. He intends to repay the 
creditors directly and will contact the remaining creditors to arrange for repayment of his 
debts. (GX 6; Tr. 38-39; Tr. 49.) He was scheduled to move in August 2016, and his 
monthly rent payment will be $200 less. He will use this money to pay his creditors. (Tr. 
49.) He will also use his tax refund to pay off several of the smaller SOR debts. (Tr. 28.) 
He opened two credit cards, one with a $500 limit and one with a $1,500 limit, to help 
3 
 
reestablish his credit. Last year, he used his tax refund to pay off the balances on these 
cards. (Tr. 27.)  
Beginning in July 2011, Applicant underwent a periodic reinvestigation. Before 
the investigation was completed, he was laid off from his job in December 2013. He was 
not notified that his clearance processing was terminated, and continued to seek 
employment that required him to have a clearance. He accepted a job offer and was 
informed by the potential employer that his clearance was no longer active. (GX 1.) 
Between 2013 and 2015, when he began working for his current employer, he did not 
earn enough money to address his delinquent debts. Additionally, his daughter was 
born in 2013, and his living expenses were necessarily higher. (Tr. 50-52.)  
In 2015, Applicant moved from his home state to his current state for his current 
job. His employment processing took about six weeks, during which time Applicant had 
no income, but did have his regular expenses. He exhausted the small amount of 
savings he had. (Tr. 52.) He works approximately 20 hours overtime monthly. (Tr. 45.) 
He is a full-time student studying for an associate’s degree with an anticipated 
graduation date of June 2017, and currently maintains a high grade point average. He 
intends to continue his education to obtain a bachelor’s degree, which would increase 
his earning potential with his current employer. (Tr. 74-75.) Applicant’s wife does not 
currently work outside the home. She is a pharmaceutical technician, but she and 
Applicant cannot afford the cost of licensing since they moved to a different state. (Tr. 
29; Tr. 52.) She worked for a period of time, but did not earn enough to offset the cost of 
daycare. (Tr. 52-53.) She will go back to school for nursing once Applicant completes 
his studies. (Tr. 29.) 
Applicant had an employer-issued credit card from 2008 until 2011, which he 
used for travel-related expenses. The creditor required that the balance be paid in full 
each month. However, Applicant’s employer did not timely reimburse Applicant for his 
travel expenses, he could not afford to pay the balance, and the card accrued late fees. 
In April 2011, Applicant canceled the card. In May 2011, Applicant received a written 
warning letter for using his employer-issued credit card for personal expenses. The 
letter also alleged that he was dishonest about the status of the card and the nature of 
the personal charges. The letter states that Applicant told his supervisor that he 
voluntarily canceled the card, but that the card was actually canceled by the creditor 
because it was delinquent. It also states that Applicant lied about the nature of the 
personal charges, but does not explain what the alleged discrepancy was. (GX 2.) 
Applicant stated on his e-QIP and in his testimony that the personal charges were for 
buying groceries at a large retail store. He also stated that he voluntarily canceled the 
card. He testified that he knew the letter was not accurate, but that he was required to 
sign the letter or be terminated. He paid the balance due on the card in April 2011. (Tr. 
56-62.) He has had an employer-issued credit card since 2015. (Tr. 70.) 
Applicant lives within his means and has not incurred any delinquent debt since 
2011. (Tr. 47; GX 2; GX 3.) He now has health insurance through his employer and is 
making contributions to his 401(k). (Tr. 28.) He disclosed the delinquent credit-card 
debts on his e-QIP. (GX 1.) He was contrite, candid, and straight-forward while 
4 
 
testifying. He accepts responsibility for his delinquent debts and vows to complete the 
repayment of them. (Tr. 26-27.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
5 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 However, a person can mitigate concerns about his ability to handle and 
safeguard classified information raised by his financial circumstances by establishing 
one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. The relevant 
mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose from circumstances largely beyond his 
control. As a result of his divorce in 2010, he was left responsible for the marital debt, 
which is the majority of the debt alleged in the SOR. He also paid his ex-wife half of the 
monies he had in his account. Between 2013 and 2015, he was underemployed. He has 
additional expenses since the birth of his daughter in 2013. It is currently impractical for 
Applicant’s wife to work outside the home. He acted responsibly by living with his 
parents from 2010 until 2014 to reduce expenses and not incur greater debt.  He met 
with a credit consolidating company, but did not contract with them because their fees 
were too high. Despite being the sole earner for his family, he lives within his means 
and has not incurred any delinquent debt since 2011.  
  
 Applicant has paid one of the SOR debts, is making payments on a large credit-
card debt, and will pay some of the smaller debts with his 2016 tax refund. He has two 
low-balance credit cards that are current and he is using them appropriately to 
reestablish his credit. He is a full-time student with a good grade point average who 
views his education as an investment in his future. He has acted in good faith by paying 
off a debt, making payments on another, and accepting responsibility for his debts. 
“Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a person’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR 
Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
    
 Although Applicant’s financial record is not perfect, he has enacted a reasonable 
plan to resolve his delinquent debts within his means. The circumstances that led to his 
indebtedness are unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(f): “violation of a 
written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer as a condition 
of employment.” 
 
 The mitigating condition listed at AG ¶ 17(c): “the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is relevant. 
 
 Applicant’s one-time misuse of his employer-issued credit card for personal 
charges happened over five years ago. He fully repaid the creditor in 2011. The 
allegations in the warning letter that Applicant had repeatedly lied to his employer about 
the nature of his purchases and the status of the card were unclear and inconclusive. I 
found Applicant’s explanation of the circumstances to be credible and consistent with 
the record evidence, and his demeanor to be honest, forthcoming, and candid. 
Therefore, I conclude that he has mitigated the Guideline E concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
8 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has worked as a federal contractor since he graduated from high 
school in 2006, with the exception of a brief lay off. He held a security clearance for 
almost eight years. He lives within his means, and provides for his family. I am confident 
that Applicant will continue his good-faith efforts to resolve his remaining delinquent 
debts. 
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts and his 
misuse of a company credit card. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.l:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
