 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-06211  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 25, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on November 1, 2011.  On February 24, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on May 26, 2015, and 
requested an Administrative Determination by an administrative judge.  Department 
Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 27, 2016.  Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM.  The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2016.  Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1.c. of the SOR, with explanation.  He denied the factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.a., 
1.b. and 1.d. of the SOR. 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant is a 59 year old “shipper/receiver/truck driver,” who holds a secret 
security clearance.  (Item 4 at pages 5, 9 and 22.)  Applicant wife lost her “job in 
December of 2007,” and did not find employment “until 2010.”  (Answer at page 10.)  
With the death of her “Dad in August of 2013,” they have also “been helping her 
[mother] out” financially.  (Id.)  These occurrences caused Applicant’s alleged financial 
difficulties. 
 
 1.a. Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor A, as the result of a 
mortgage foreclosure, in the amount of about $266,439.  In his Answer Applicant avers 
“Foreclosure has been discussed but not determined to date [May 26, 2015].”  (Answer 
at page 1.)  The Government’s most recent, September 2015, credit report supports 
Applicant’s averment as it shows that the mortgage is not past due.  (Item 6 at page 1.) 
 
 1.b.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor B, as the result of a motor 
vehicle loan, in the mount of about $10,362.  In his Answer Applicant avers “we paid the 
negotiated amount, then it was determined the debt was satisfied.” He further avers that 
the debt “was lowered to $3,000.00 of which we paid a total of $2,150.00” (Answer at 
page 3), and submits a court document noting “no ability to pay currently” (Answer at 
page 4).  Based his submissions, Applicant now owes at most $850 to Creditor B for 
this past-due debt.  I find that he is making good-faith effort to address this debt; and as 
such, this allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.c.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor C, however, the past-due 
amount according to the Government’s most recent credit report is $508, not the $4,877 
alleged, which is the “Balance” due, but not past due, on this debt.  (Item 6 at page 4.)   
 
 1.d.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor D in the amount of about 
$2,127.  In his Answer Applicant avers “We paid the negotiated amount and the balance 
remaining was processed thru our taxes on a 1099 (see attached).”  The attached 
documents support Applicant’s averment.  (Answer at pages 4~9.)  This allegation is 
found for Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. He has been unable or 
unwilling to address two his delinquencies. The evidence raises security concerns under 
both of these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are directly related to his spouse’s unemployment, 
and their financial support of her mother, conditions which were beyond his control.  The 
$1,358 that is arguably still owed pales in comparison to the $283,805 alleged. 
Applicant has established that he has acted reasonably or responsibly under the 
circumstances. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
financial problems remain unresolved. However, he has submitted a statement from his 
wife as to his character and the genesis of the past-due debts, which establish the debts 
were incurred due to circumstances beyond his control.  He has acted responsibly by 
resolving the vast majority of his debt.  He can be trusted to continue to resolve his 
delinquent accounts.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FORAPPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b.   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c.   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d.   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
 
