KEYWORD: Guideline K; Guideline M; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings are supported by substantial evidence.  We give
deference to a Judge’s credibility determinations. Security violations strike at the heart of the
industrial security program.  Applicant’s denial of wrongdoing undercut his efforts to show
rehabilitation.  
CASE NO: 14-05396.a1
DATE: 01/10/2017
DATE: January 10, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05396
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Arran S. Treadway, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 6, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), Guideline
M (Use of Information Technology Systems), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On August 31, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees and works for a Defense contractor.  He is
seeking to retain a security clearance that he holds in connection with his employment.
The Judge made extensive findings about Applicant’s security-significant conduct, which
was alleged under each of the three guidelines cited in the SOR.  In essence, Applicant committed
three security violations.  In 2012, he knowingly attempted to introduce computer discs containing
classified information onto a hard drive that was not accredited for that material.  In January 2013,
Applicant possessed classified information without authorization and without signing appropriate
receipts.  The information in question pertained to a contract that had ended, and use of documents
associated with that contract was limited.  Finally, in April 2013, Applicant put a CD pertaining to
this contract into an unapproved classified information system and printed classified information
without authorization.  
Applicant did not agree that he had violated any security protocols, claiming that his use of
the classified information in question was with appropriate authorization.  However, Applicant’s
employer gave him a letter of reprimand (LOR) for “clear violation of the company’s Corporate
Security Standard Practice and Procedures.”  Decision at 6.  The LOR stated, in pertinent part:
The aggressive and persistent nature of your actions in your attempts to gain
possession of classified materials in which you were told by corporate security that
you could not possess on more than one occasion raises suspicion about your intent
in regard to proper handling of classified materials.  Id.
The LOR offered Applicant the choice of accepting one day of leave without pay as an alternative
to being fired.  Applicant accepted this offer.  Applicant signed an acknowledgment that he had
received the LOR and was provided with an opportunity to discuss it.  Applicant contended that he
signed the LOR through coercion.  However, the Judge noted that Applicant’s signature only meant
that he had received a copy of the LOR and had an opportunity to discuss it.  
Applicant is highly respected in his field of expertise.  His character references stated that
he is knowledgeable about security requirements and is able to follow rules and regulations.  One
person, who has worked with Applicant for over ten years, expressed “utmost confidence” that
Applicant handles classified information in accordance with regulatory guidance.  Applicant served
as a reservist in the military, retiring in the grade of 0-4.  He received numerous awards and
commendations during his military career.
2
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge acknowledged Applicant’s professional competence and his contributions to the
Defense industry.  He noted Applicant’s having held a clearance for many years and his
understanding of security issues.  He stated that Applicant had worked on the contract referenced
above and “obviously felt a sense of ownership and entitlement about the material he had created
over the years concerning this contract.”  Id. at 11.  The Judge stated that Applicant felt that the
security requirements placed upon him in reference to this contract were unnecessary, but that he
knew, or should have known, what the requirements were.  
The Judge concluded that Applicant violated security protocols and that he did so knowingly
and with an intent to circumvent the strictures that his company placed on documents pertinent to
the contract.  Although recognizing that others might have born some responsibility as well, he
stated that it was Applicant’s duty to follow security rules, regardless of the conduct of others. 
The Judge stated that Applicant continues to deny having done anything wrong.  However,
there is no support for Applicant’s claims that he had authorization for his use of the contract
materials.  The Judge observed that security rules are not voluntary.  Given Applicant’s refusal to
acknowledge wrongdoing, none of the mitigating conditions are entitled to favorable application. 
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge concluded that there is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation
or other behavioral changes.  The Judge stated flatly that, based on the record that was before him,
he could not conclude “that Applicant would be likely to properly obey security rules and
regulations in the future if faced with the same or similar circumstances.”  Id. at 13.  As a
consequence, the Judge entered adverse findings under each of the guidelines.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge’s findings did not address significant evidence that was
essential to a fair evaluation of his case.  Among other things, he cites to his having held a clearance
for many years without incident or concern, his educational attainments, and the passage of over
three years since the last infraction.  He also contends that the Judge erred by finding that he had
violated security rules.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 14-04226 at 3
(App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015).   
Concerning whether Applicant had committed security infractions, the record contains a
copy of an incident report prepared by officials at Applicant’s place of employment.  Government
Exhibit (GE) 4, Security Incidents Final Report, dated May 1, 2013.  This report describes
Applicant’s conduct in detail and lists the names of persons interviewed, concluding that Applicant
deliberately disregarded established security requirements.  At the hearing, Applicant could not
provide a reason for the persons cited in the report to have fabricated evidence against him.  See Tr.
at 64-66.  The record also contains a copy of the LOR that the Judge described in his findings.  GE
5, Memo, dated May 6, 2013.  This document also describes Applicant’s conduct, though not in so
3
great detail as GE 4.  It characterized Applicant’s infractions as “a clear violation” of the company’s
security practices and procedures.  These two exhibits, when read in conjunction with the record
evidence as a whole, constitute substantial evidence that Applicant performed acts that constituted
deliberate violations of rules designed to protect classified information.  
Applicant states that he acknowledged receipt of the LOR through duress.  He describes GE
5 as a “coerced confession” and argues that it is of no evidentiary value.  Appeal Brief at 8. 
However, GE 5 is not a confession but a disciplinary action.  Applicant’s signature did not certify
that he agreed with the content of the LOR, only that he had received it and had been given an
opportunity to discuss it, as the Judge found.  Applicant’s contention that he was pressured to sign
this receipt acknowledgment, even if true, does not undermine the Judge’s reliance upon GE 5 as
a credible presentation of Applicant’s conduct and of the intent that underlay it.  We give deference
to a Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  We find no reason to disturb the
Judge’s findings that Applicant’s conduct violated security rules.  
Concerning Applicant’s other arguments, a Judge is not expected to make findings about
every piece of evidence in the record, which would be a practical impossibility.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-05795 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).  As stated above, he explicitly addressed
Applicant’s long experience in holding a security clearance, and he gave consideration to other
favorable evidence, such as Applicant’s educational and professional attainments, his good
reputation, and his knowledge of security rules.  The findings, viewed as a whole, captured facts
sufficient to support  a reasoned analysis of the concerns raised in the SOR.  The Judge’s material
findings are based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences
that could be drawn from the record.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change
the outcome of the case.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings
of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25,
2014).
The balance of Applicant’s brief constitutes a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, which is not enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27,
2016).  Security violations “strike at the heart of the industrial security program.”  A Judge must
give any claims of reform or rehabilitation “strict scrutiny.”  ISCR Case No. 11-09219 at 3 (App.
Bd. Mar. 31, 2014).  In this case, as the Judge noted, Applicant’s presentation consisted in
overwhelming measure of denials that he had done anything wrong.  Given the substantial evidence
to the contrary, however, the Judge did not err in concluding that Applicant had not met his burden
of persuasion.  
Applicant notes that his most recent infraction is over three years old.  He argues that his
conduct “cannot be repeated due to behavioral and environmental changes which preclude the
conditions of 2012-2013 from being repeated.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  However, Applicant’s persistent
denial of wrongdoing supports the Judge’s conclusion that he has not demonstrated rehabilitation. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-03620 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 6, 2009), a Guideline J case in which the
applicant’s denial of criminal intent undercut his effort to show rehabilitation.    
     
4
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  An applicant who deliberately engages in security violations demonstrates a disregard for, 
or indifference to, national security interests and undermines the integrity and effectiveness of the
industrial security program.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08119 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2010).  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
