 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06596 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s foreclosed mortgage resulted from his divorce, a circumstance beyond 
his control. His clean 2014 credit report shows a track record of debt payment, and that 
he is in control of his financial situation. Financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 4, 2014. After 
reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, on 
November 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 11, 2016 (Answer), and requested a decision 
based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant by transmittal letter dated March 4, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
March 16, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to 
provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM or submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to me 
on December 22, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny the SOR sole allegation. I considered the SOR 
allegation denied. In his Answer, he provided some evidence in extenuation and 
mitigation. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He enlisted in the U.S. 
Navy in 1996, where he served on active duty until 1999. While in the service, he received 
a General Education Development (GED) certificate. Upon his discharge, he received a 
general under honorable conditions discharge. Applicant married in 2002 and divorced in 
2010. He has two sons, ages 11 and 10, of this marriage.  
 
Applicant has been working for his employer, a federal contractor, since 2002. 
There is no evidence of any security violations or issues of concern, except for the SOR 
allegation. This is his first application for a security clearance. 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2014 SCA asked Applicant to disclose 
whether during the last seven years he had any financial problems. Applicant answered 
“yes” and disclosed that he had been delinquent in a mortgage that was foreclosed. The 
subsequent background investigation confirmed the foreclosed mortgage alleged in the 
SOR, with a “past due” amount of $46,804. Applicant’s credit report, his 2014 statement 
to a government investigator, and his SOR answer established the SOR allegation.  
 
During a July 2014 interview with a government investigator, Applicant explained 
that he and his then wife purchased a $340,000 home in 2007, using his Veterans’ 
Administration (VA) loan benefits. In 2009, when they separated, Applicant wanted to rent 
or sell the property. His then wife refused, continued living in the property, and claimed 
she would make the payments. She failed to make the payments and the past due 
payments accrued to $46,804, when the bank foreclosed the mortgage in October 2010.  
 
Applicant claimed that the past due payments balance of $46,804 was written off 
by the bank after the foreclosure and sale of the house. He claimed that neither the VA 
or the bank are collecting the delinquent balance, and that he is not required to pay it 
back. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of his 2010 divorce. Applicant’s file 
credit report only shows one blemish – the delinquent mortgage. In 2014, he admitted to 
the investigator he had another delinquent debt for medical services provided to his son. 
His ex-wife’s medical insurance only covered part of the charge. She refused to pay the 
remaining debt, and the debt went into collection. When he found out about the collection 
in 2012, he immediately paid it. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant’s file credit report confirmed that he had no other delinquent accounts. 
He has a clean credit report with 34 trades and only one delinquent transaction – his 
mortgage. Based on the FORM evidence, it appears that Applicant’s finances are stable, 
and he can meet his current financial obligations. There is no evidence to show that 
Applicant had any prior financial problems before his divorce. Because of his service 
experience and work for a federal contractor, Applicant understands that he is required 
to demonstrate financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
  
 
4 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent mortgage payments and the mortgage foreclosure are 
documented in his 2014 credit report, SOR response, and prior statement. The mortgage 
had a “past due” amount of $46,804, at the time the mortgage was foreclosed. There is 
no evidence to show that Applicant was responsible for any mortgage deficiency balance 
after the property was foreclosed. Also, there is no evidence to show that either the bank 
or the VA are attempting to collect any money from Applicant after the foreclosure and 
sale of the property. Notwithstanding, the mortgage payments were delinquent for a 
period until the property was foreclosed and sold. The past due mortgage payments and 
the mortgage foreclosure raise financial considerations concerns. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
There is no evidence showing that Applicant had financial problems before 2010. 
His financial problems were caused by his 2010 divorce – a circumstance beyond his 
control. Applicant tried to rent or sell the house during the divorce, but his ex-wife refused 
to do so. He did not submit documentary evidence to show his efforts to rent or sell the 
property. However, considering the evidence as a whole, I find it is likely he did. There is 
no evidence to show that the bank or the VA are collecting the “past due” mortgage 
payments. He averred the debt was “written off” by the bank after the foreclosure and 
sale of the property.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past financial problems do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find there are 
clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved and is under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by a circumstance beyond his control, 
i.e., his 2010 divorce. There is no evidence showing that he acquired any additional 
delinquent debt after 2010. His 2014 credit report shows no additional financial issues of 
concern. Of 34 trades reflected in his credit report, there is only one issue – the alleged 
foreclosed mortgage. Applicant’s clean credit report shows he has established a 
“meaningful track record” of debt payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial 
responsibility. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
  
 
6 
                                         
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
