 
 
 
 
1 
           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 14-06521 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean Bigley, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns arising from his 
connections to Israel. He did not mitigate the foreign preference security concerns 
relating to his Israeli passport or the financial security concerns arising from failing to file 
income tax returns for nine years. The personal conduct security concerns are found in 
his favor, as they were adequately addressed under the financial guideline. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 18, 2013, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), as part of a re-investigation for a security clearance. 
On January 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the following: Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence; Guideline C, Foreign Preference; Guideline F, Financial Considerations; and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
 
 
 
2 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on February 9, 2015, and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 2.) On January 5, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing nine Items, was mailed to Applicant on January 6, 2016, and received by him 
on January 11, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. He timely submitted a Response to the FORM, along with 
attachments, marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I.1 Department Counsel did 
not object to those exhibits, and they are admitted into the record. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on December 13, 2016. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings  
 
Objection to the Admission of Exhibits 
  
  In his Response to the FORM, Applicant objected to the admissibility of GE 4, 
which is a summary of a March 2014 background interview of Applicant, and GE 5, 
which is a summary of a March 2009 background interview of Applicant. He asserted 
that the interviews were incomplete and inaccurate. Department Counsel did not reply 
to Applicant’s filed objections. Hence, both summary interviews of GE 4 and GE 5 are 
inadmissible. However, attached to GE 4 are Federal and state tax-related documents 
provided to the Government by Applicant. Those are admissible, some of which were 
submitted with Applicant’s Response. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
In its FORM, Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice 
(Request) of certain facts relating to Israel. I marked the Request and supporting 
documents pertinent to Israel as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Department Counsel also 
submitted with said request an Augmentation of Administrative Notice, which I marked 
as HE 1(A). In his Response, Applicant objected to the Government’s supporting 
documents included in HE 1, and submitted his Motion for Administrative Notice 
(Motion), along with supporting documents. I marked his Motion as HE 2. Department 
Counsel did not file objections to the Motion. Both Department Counsel’s Request and 
Applicant’s Motion are granted. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters 
of general knowledge pertinent to Israel, and not subject to reasonable dispute. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out in the findings of fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
                                            
1At the time Applicant answered the SOR, he was not represented by counsel. On January 21, 2016, 
Applicant retained Counsel, who subsequently filed the Response to the SOR.  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He 
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c. He admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 2, SOR ¶ 3, 
and SOR ¶ 4. Those admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old. He was born in Israel. He attended high school there 
and earned an associate’s degree from an Israeli university in 1970. He was 
conscripted into the Israeli army from 1970 until 1974, and received an honorable 
discharge. He immigrated to the United States in 1975 and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1981. He earned a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university in 1977 and a 
master’s degree in 1989. He has worked for a federal contractor since 1986 and has 
held a security clearance for many years. Applicant is divorced since 2004. He and his 
former wife, a U.S. citizen, have two children, who were born in the United States and 
are residents. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant submitted a performance evaluation for 2014. His manager noted that 
he is a “solid performer.” (Response: AE A.) Applicant provided four letters of 
recommendation. His manager since 2009 strongly recommends Applicant for a 
security clearance. He stated that Applicant “is extremely meticulous in adhering to the 
protocols for handling and communicating classified information.” (Response: AE B.) 
Applicant’s colleague for ten years stated that Applicant has “shown great dedication to 
his job and most of all this country, which he proudly calls home.” (Response: AE B.) 
Two friends also submitted character references for Applicant. (Response: AE B.) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased. Both were citizens and residents of Israel. His 
sister is a citizen and resident of Israel. His sister is not an employee of the Israeli 
government. Applicant has monthly contact with his sister and visits her annually. He 
has a niece and a cousin who are citizens and residents of Israel. He visits them when 
he travels to Israel, and emails them at the holidays. He has three friends who are 
citizens and residents of Israel. Applicant sees them during his visits, and emails them 
at the holidays. (Response.) 
 
 Applicant inherited an interest in a condominium owned by his mother. The 
property was sold after her death and Applicant received about $143,000 in 2014, which 
was deposited into his U.S. account. He does not have any property or financial 
interests in Israel. (Item 2; Response.)  
 
Foreign Preference  
 
 Applicant is an Israeli citizen by birth. He has a current Israeli passport that 
expires in 2024.2 He maintains and uses it to travel to Israel because Israel requires “its 
citizens to enter and exit the country using their Israeli passports.” (Items 2, 3.) He 
                                            
2Applicant has maintained an active Israeli passport since becoming a U.S. citizen. (Response.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
travels there once or twice a year to visit family and friends. (Items 2, 3, 7.) In 
accordance with the U.S. Defense Security Service’s regulations, Applicant’s facility 
security officer (FSO) maintains that passport in a secure area. Applicant retrieves the 
passport when he travels to Israel and surrenders it to the FSO on his return. 
(Response: AE F.) He receives foreign briefings before he departs for Israel and has 
debriefings after he returns. He is willing to renounce his Israeli citizenship, but has not 
done so because of the inconvenience and expense of traveling to an Israeli embassy 
or consulate. (Item 2; Response.) He strongly asserted his loyalty to the United States. 
(Item 2.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant admitted that he did not timely file Federal and state income tax returns 
or pay taxes for tax years 2001 through 2009. His unpaid taxes for those eight years 
totaled about $87,634. The IRS filed liens for those tax years over the course of several 
years. Applicant completed all Federal tax payments for those taxes in May 2012. 
Applicant’s unpaid state taxes for those years totaled about $14,000. He resolved the 
state liens by 2012. (Item 8: Attachments; Response.) He attributed his tax problems to 
three factors: a difficult divorce that was finalized in 2004; paying his children’s college 
expenses and support; and gambling between 2002 and 2005, resulting in losses of 
$37,000. (Items 2, 3, 7.)  
 
        Although not alleged in the SOR, the IRS filed a Federal tax lien for $8,642 for 
tax year 1999 in 2004. That lien was paid in 2011. In 2004 the IRS filed a Federal tax 
lien for $9,091 for tax year 2000. That lien was paid in 2005.3  
  
        Applicant accepts full responsibility for not timely filing Federal and state income 
tax returns and paying taxes. He acknowledged that he made a serious mistake. He has 
timely filed all returns and resolved all taxes for tax years 2010 thru 2014.4 (Item 2; 
Response: AE I.) He sought treatment for his gambling addiction in 2005 and no longer 
has a problem. (Item 3; Response.)  
 
Israel   
 
 Israel is a parliamentary democracy whose prime minister heads the government 
and exercises executive power. It has a diversified, technologically advanced economy 
with a strong high technology sector. The major industrial sectors include high-
technology electronic and biomedical equipment, metal products, chemicals, and 
transportation equipment. The United States is Israel’s largest single trading partner and 
Israel is the largest recipient of U.S. aid since World War II.  
                                            
3These two tax years and liens were not alleged in the SOR; hence, they will not be considered in the 
analysis of disqualifying conditions. However, they may be considered in the analysis of mitigating 
conditions, whole person, and credibility.  
  
4The FORM was issued in January 2016, at which time 2015 taxes were not due.   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 The United States and Israel have a close friendship based on common 
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. However, they have 
different policies on other important issues. The United States is concerned with Israeli 
military sales, inadequate Israeli protection of U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-
related cases. They have regularly discussed Israel’s sale of sensitive security 
equipment and technology to various countries, including China. Israel reportedly is 
China’s second major arms supplier, after Russia. Israel is also an active collector of 
propriety information. It has been identified as targeting multiple U.S. Government 
organizations since at least 1997. Israeli military officers have been implicated in this 
type of technology collection in the United States. There have also been cases involving 
illegal export, or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted and dual use technology to 
Israel.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse 
decision shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for foreign influence are set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;5  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
                                            
5The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Most nations with substantial military establishments seek classified and 
sensitive information from the United States because it has the largest military industrial 
complex and most advanced military establishment in the world. Israeli military officials 
could potentially seek or accept classified information from U.S. citizens with access to 
this material. Applicant’s access to classified information and his connection and 
contacts with his relatives and friends residing in Israel could create a potential conflict 
of interest, if they were taken hostage or otherwise threatened if he did not cooperate 
and disclose protected information. The evidence establishes both AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant provided proof that he no longer has any financial 
interest in Israel; thus, the evidence does not establish a disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Those 
with potential application in this case are:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government; a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government; the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States; or there is a serious 
 
 
 
 
8 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. Israel’s close, friendly relationship to the 
United States, its adherences to human rights standards and rule of law, its leading role 
in the suppression of terrorists, and the lack of evidence that Israel uses coercive tactics 
in its espionage targeting of the United States, all tend to negate a concern that 
Appellant’s relationship with his family residing in Israel poses a security risk.  
 
Based on those facts, it is unlikely that Applicant will be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and his relationship with his sister, cousin and 
niece living in Israel. With the peaceful, long-standing alliance between Israel and the 
United States, it is improbable that Israeli intelligence officials would use coercion or 
pressure against a U.S. citizen living in the United States, such as Applicant, in an 
attempt to gather valuable or classified information from the United States. In addition, 
none of Applicant’s family members in Israel are involved in the government or military. 
Only their physical presence creates the potential that their interests could be 
threatened to the point that Applicant would be confronted with a choice between their 
interest and those of the United States. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has some application.   
 
Applicant produced significant evidence establishing AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his 
relationship and depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict 
of interest in favor of the United States. He has lived in the United States since 1975. 
His children are U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. He holds bank accounts in 
the United States. He attended U.S. universities. Since 1986, he has successfully 
worked for a federal contractor, and has the support of his manager and colleagues. He 
does not own property in Israel. There is no evidence that he has connections or 
contact with any people in Israel other than three relatives and three friends. He strongly 
asserts his loyalty to the United States. 
 
Applicant maintains ongoing communication, both in person and via email, with 
his sister, niece, cousin and friends in Israel. Hence, AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply, as those 
contacts are sufficiently frequent and not casual.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 security concerns involving foreign preference are:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship 
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 (b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant was born in Israel. He became a U.S. citizen in 1987. He has 
maintained an Israeli passport since becoming a U.S. citizen, in order to enter and exit 
Israel more easily, and as required by Israel for any person holding Israeli citizenship. 
He regularly used and renewed the passport over the years to enter Israel to visit family 
and friends there. His current passport does not expire until 2024. The Government 
produced sufficient evidence to establish a disqualifying condition under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) 
and 10(b), and the burden shifts to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate or mitigate 
these facts and the resulting security concerns. 
The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 11 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s foreign passport: 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
Applicant expressed his willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship in his 
Answer to the SOR; however, he has not taken any steps to effectuate that. He 
maintains an active Israeli passport, which he uses for traveling to Israel on an annual 
basis. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 11(b) or AG ¶ 11(e). 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying condition that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;   
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has a nine-year history of not timely filing Federal and state income tax 
returns, and failing to pay income taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 sets out four conditions that could potentially mitigate financial security 
concerns under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant’s tax problems spanned a period of eight years from 2001 to 2009. 
Because that time frame was not so distant and included multiple years, AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant established limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), as there is 
some evidence to conclude that Applicant’s marital issues contributed to his tax 
problems, which may have been circumstances beyond his control. However, 
Applicant’s failure to file his Federal and state income tax returns began in 2001, three 
years before his divorce, and continued for five years after. He also testified that he was 
paying his children’s college expenses and acknowledged that he had a gambling 
problem, both of which contributed to his problems and was within his control. There is 
no evidence indicating that he acted responsibly during those years.     
 
Applicant presented evidence that he completed payments on all outstanding tax 
liens in 2012. He timely filed Federal and state income tax returns and paid required 
taxes for the years 2010 through 2014. He also participated in counseling for his 
gambling addiction. There is an indication that his tax and financial problems are under 
control at this time, establishing some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Applicant did not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). The Federal and state 
governments filed tax liens for years 2001 through 2009. In addition, the Federal 
government filed tax liens for 1999 and 2000. As a consequence of those legal actions, 
Applicant began resolving his tax debts, rather than initiating good-faith efforts. 
Applicant’s explanation that his divorce affected his finances does not adequately 
explain why he failed to file returns for the years preceding the divorce or subsequent to 
it.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could generate security concerns and may be 
disqualifying. While Applicant’s failure to file income tax returns for nine years 
demonstrates a serious lack of judgment under this guideline, those security concerns, 
as alleged in the SOR, were adequately analyzed and addressed under the financial 
considerations guideline. This guideline is found in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all facts and circumstances 
 
 
 
 
12 
surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent, 66-year-old, who has been a U.S. 
citizen since 1981, and has successfully worked for a defense contractor since 1986.  
 
In regard to Guideline B cases, the Appeal Board requires the whole-person 
analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of 
an applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his 
or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). In this instance, Applicant 
demonstrated strong relationship, financial, and professional ties to the United States, 
sufficient to mitigate his connections to six Israeli resident citizens. These are positive 
factors in this case.  
 
   However, the adverse factors in this case outweigh those facts. Applicant has 
maintained an Israeli passport since becoming a citizen in 1981. Although he asserted 
he would renounce his Israeli citizenship, thereby relinquishing his passport, he has not 
done so, despite being placed on notice in January 2015 that it created a security 
concern. Also troubling is the fact that between 2001 and 2009, Applicant failed to 
timely file Federal and state income tax returns and pay taxes for reasons that involved 
poor judgment and gambling. Tax liens were also filed for unpaid taxes for 1999 and 
2000. Applicant completed payments of all owed taxes in 2012 and has timely filed his 
2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014 returns. While he is establishing a track record of 
complying with tax laws, his actions to date are not sufficient to offset a 10-year history 
of non-compliance with a fundamental legal obligation to timely file tax returns and pay 
taxes. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).6  
   
The record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concerns, 
but not the security concerns arising under the foreign preference and financial 
considerations guidelines. The security concerns raised under the personal conduct 
guideline are found in his favor for the reason previously discussed. 
 
 
 
                                            
6 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:          For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:          For Applicant 
 
          Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:                    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:                    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:                    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                             
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
