                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-05986
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James Norman, Esquire, Chief Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.  
 
History of Case
On May 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) ), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) to Applicant detailing why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 19, 2015, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on October 16, 2015, and was scheduled for hearing on
February 2, 2016. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
2
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of eight exhibits (GEs 1-8); Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and
15 exhibits (AEs A-O). The transcript (R.T.) was received on February 10, 2016.
Besides its eight exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of facts
covered by 13 source documents, which are identified as follows: U.S.-Taiwan
Relationship: Overview of Policy Issues, Congressional Research Service (December
2014); Joint U.S.-China Communique (Shanghai February 1972); Joint U.S.-China
Communique on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the United States of
America and the People’s Republic of China (January 1979); U.S.-PRC Joint
Communique (August 1982); U.S. Relations with Taiwan Fact Sheet: Foreign
Representation (February 2015); Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic
Collection and Industrial Espionage-2000, National Counterintelligence Center (2001);
Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage-
2005, National Counterintelligence Center (2006); and Espionage and Other
Compromises of National Security, Defense Personnel and Security Research Center
(November 2009).
Other documents requested for official notice by the Government include the
following: Summary of Major U.S. Export Enforcement, Economic Espionage, Trade
Secret and Embargo-Related Criminal Cases, U.S. Department of Justice (October
2014); Taiwan Exporter is Sentenced to Three and a Half Years for Conspiring to Export
Missile Components from the United States to Iran, U.S. Department of Commerce
(August 2010); Two Taiwanese Nationals Charged in New Jersey with Conspiring to
Export Sensitive U.S. Military technology to China, (D. N.J. April 2012); and North Wales
Man Sentenced for Illegally Exporting Goods, U.S. Department of Commerce (January
2013); 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007);
ISCR Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 12, 2006). Administrative notice is
appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well known. See Stein,
Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). The Government’s administrative
notice request was admitted as HE 1.
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
above-named background reports (Administrative Notice I through XIII) addressing the
geopolitical situation and security concerns extant in Taiwan. Administrative notice was
extended to the source documents themselves, consistent  with the provisions of Fed. R.
Evid. 201. This notice did not foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy and
reliability of the information contained in the reports addressing Taiwan’s current status,
or from relying on additional information in the documents not covered in the
Government’s Administrative Notice.  
In addition to the above-described documents, I took administrative notice of a
document covering the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS), DHS Announces
3
Taiwan’s Designation into Visa Waiver Program, (October 2012) and  CBP, Taiwan
AEO, Agree to Cargo Security Program Standards, Department of Homeland Security
(November 2012) Applicant’s submissions were assigned administrative notice numbers
XIV and XV. I also took administrative notice of Background Note: Taiwan, U.S.
Department of State (September 2008). After receiving no objections from the parties, I
assigned this document an administrative notice designation of XVI. I took administrative
notice also of post-hearing documents submitted by Applicant as follows: Major U.S.
Arms Sales Since 1990, Congressional Research Service (August 2014); Transfer of
Excess United States Naval Vessels, Public Law 113-276 (December 2014); DHS
Announces Taiwan’s Designation into Visa Waiver Program, Department of Homeland
Security (October 2012); and Summary of Major U.S. Export Enforcement, Economic
Espionage, Trade Secret and Embargo-Related Cases, U.S. Department of Justice
(January 2015). I assigned these Applicant submissions Administrative Notice numbers
of XVII-XX1.
Applicant’s submitted post-hearing decisions of administrative judges addressing
foreign influence issues involving Taiwan cover non-precedential decisions and are
admitted for persuasive purposes only. I assigned a HE 2 designation to these decisions.
                                                                          
Procedural Issues
Before the commencement of the hearing, Applicant formally waived his
procedural right to 15 days advance notice of the hearing. His waiver was accepted.
Prior to the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend
subparagraph 1.b of the SOR to add a second brother-in-law who is a citizen and
resident of Taiwan to conform to the evidence in the record.  (Tr. 76-77) For good cause
shown, Department Counsel’s motion was granted. Applicant admitted the allegations as
amended and was afforded the opportunity to address the amendment in his presented
evidence. 
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to keep the record
open to permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented evidence
of the impact on the Government’s foreign influence concerns from the recent Taiwan
presidential elections, as well as provide documentary evidence of balancing security
concerns surrounding Taiwan’s use of commercial espionage to acquire dual use
technology with dual use military applications. For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted 14 days to supplement the record. Within the time permitted, Applicant provided
a financial summary, a character reference, a snapshot of his wife’s account balance in
her Taiwan bank account, his wife’s certificate of naturalization, and an email from
Applicant. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AEs P-T. Additional submissions
covering prior DOHA decisions and articles covering Taiwan sources in non-Government
publications were admitted as AEs U, Z, AA, HH, and KK-PP. 
Applicant’s submissions that were not objected to by Department Counsel for the
taking of administrative notice were assigned administrative notice designations of XVII-
XIX. These administrative notice documents consist of the following: Major U.S. Arm
4
Sales Since 1990, Congressional Research Service (August 2014); Transfer of Excess
U.S. Naval Vessels, Public Law 113-276 (December 2014); DHS Announces Taiwan’s
Designation into Visa Waiver Program, (October 2012); and Summary of Major U.S.
Export Enforcement, Economic Espionage, U.S. Department of Justice (January 2015).
Remand Instructions
On October 14, 2016, the Appeal Board remanded my decision of June 20, 2016,
with instructions to resolve inconsistencies in the initial decision in accordance with the
DOD standard in 5200.2-R. Issues to be resolved under the Appeal Board’s remand
mandate are as follows: Whether Applicant met his burden of showing (1) his
relationships with his wife’s relatives residing in Taiwan do not reflect ties of affection or
obligation based on his wife’s not infrequent contacts with her mother and brothers and
the affection and/or obligation that presumably exist between an applicant and the family
members of his spouse; (2) the bank account that his wife  maintains in Taiwan is too
minimal to create security concerns; and (3) his non-SOR alleged job-related travels to
the PRC in 2005 and 2008, laptop theft in 2005, and previous revocation of his sensitive
compartmented information (SCI) access and collateral security clearance by another
agency in 2013 do not prevent him from achieving an overall favorable whole-person
assessment.
Following the remand, I afforded the parties the opportunity to supplement the
record, with or without a new hearing.  Within the 30 days allotted to supplement the
record, Applicant provided a memorandum summary of facts and arguments about
Taiwan’s country status and information about his mother-in-law and brothers-in-law.
Applicant’s post-remand submission was admitted without objection as AE EE.
Remand findings and conclusions follow. Findings made in the June 30, 2016
decision are incorporated and supplemented by additional findings and clarifications as
needed to address the issues raised in the Appeal Board’s remand decision.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has a mother-in-law and brother-in-law
(since amended to include two brother-in-laws) who are citizens and residents of Taiwan.
Allegedly, he has a spouse who has a bank account in Taiwan for the purpose of having
access to money when he and his family travel to Taiwan.
In his response, Applicant admitted to having a mother-in-law and brother-in-law
who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. He denied that either of his listed relatives
could be placed in a position where Applicant would have to choose other than for
supporting the interests of the United States. He claimed he has had a security
clearance (either secret or top secret) since 1999. He claimed there is no conflict of
interest, because of his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties to the United
States and the strong defense ties that exist between Taiwan and the United States.
5
Applicant further claimed that his interactions with his family members residing in
Taiwan are casual and infrequent. And, he claimed he has no foreign business, financial
interest, or property interest in Taiwan.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old research associate for a university-affiliated research
center and defense contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered
in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant married his wife in Taiwan in September 1994 (Tr. 85), and has two
children (ages 17 and 19), who were born and raised in the United States. (GEs 1-2) He
met his wife at a dinner party in the Fall of 1991 while both were attending graduate
school. (GEs 1-2 and 7-8; Tr. 74, 85) His wife earned her bachelor’s degree in Taiwan
and worked for two years as a physical education teacher before immigrating to the
United States in 1991 on a student’s visa to attend graduate school. (GEs 7-8; Tr. 70,
70-74)  She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2006, but maintains her dual
citizenship with Taiwan. (GE 8; Tr. 88, 92)  Currently, she teaches school and works
intermittently in various part-time jobs. (Tr. 91)
Applicant earned a bachelor’s, masters, and Ph.D degrees from respected
universities. (GE 2) He has been employed by his current employer as a research
associate for a major university since 2005. (GEs 1-2 and 7 AE A) Prior to accepting his
current position, he was employed in various research assignments at the same
university since 1999. (AEs 1-2 and 7)  Applicant claimed no military service. (GEs 1-2) 
Applicant admitted to two security violations (one in May 2010 and the other in
June 2010) while employed by his current employer. (GEs 6-7; Tr. 93-94, 96-97) The
May 2010 infraction report resulted in a verbal warning by his security officer for
unmarked media or a DVD containing classified information. (GEs 6-7; Tr. 93-94)  The
June 2010 violation involved his failure to secure a safe with classified information
located in his supervisor’s office in his mistaken belief his supervisor was still in the
building. This violation resulted in his being written up for a security violation that was
transmitted to the Defense Security Service (DSS) and directed to complete remedial
training in safe handling practices.  (GEs 7-8; Tr. 96) 
In June 2013, Applicant’s application for SCI access was denied by another
agency.  (GEs 6-7; Tr. 95-96) Also in June 2013, his top secret collateral clearance was
revoked by the same agency.  The revocation was based on a combination of his having
family connections in Taiwan and job-related travels in the PRC (Tr. 96-98, 112-118)
Whether his two security violations were cited as an additional basis is not clear.
Applicant’s current application for a security clearance represents his first attempt to
regain his security clearance following his loss of clearance in 2013 from the other
agency. (Tr. 118)
6
Between 2003 and 2009, Applicant worked on a NASA-funded research program.
(GEs 1-3 and 6-8) He visited the People’s Republic of China (the PRC) in 2005, 2006,
and 2008 to conduct research on an awarded NASA program. This travel to the PRC
was fully authorized by his university employer. (TR. 97-98) While in the PRC, he
collaborated with a foreign contact who was a visiting scholar with his university’s
research institute. (GEs 1-3 and 6-8) While on one of these research trips on job-related
travel to the PRC in 2005, his university-owned laptop was stolen from his hotel room.
(GEs 6-8 and AE EE; Tr. 99) This laptop computer contained only open source
information and no classified data. (Tr. 99-100) 
Applicant promptly reported this lap top theft to both the hotel’s management and
his university security officer who filed a report of the theft with the Navy’s Criminal
Investigative Service (NCIS). (GEs 6-8 and AE EE) The PRC contact he encountered at
the hotel on this 2005 trip to the PRC did not identify himself by name and has never
tried to reach Applicant since this 2005 exchange. (GEs 6-8 and AE EE)
Applicant has never failed to report any security infractions or contacts with
foreign nationals and has never provided any false or misleading information concerning
relevant matters to any investigator, security official, medical authority, or other party, in
connection with a personnel security determination. (GE 6 and AE EE) In DSS’s most
recent inspection of Applicant’s research facility in 2015, his facility reportedly received
the agency’s highest possible rating. (Tr. 108) Applicant’s recitations about his facility’s
rating are  credible and accepted.
Applicant has no affiliation with a foreign government (Taiwan included) and has
never had any employment or contact with a foreign government or foreign nationals
since 2008.  (GEs 1-2 and 6-8)  His children are native born citizens of the United States
who attend U.S. schools and have no foreign contacts. (GEs 1-2 and 8) Applicant
spends most of his spare time with his family and in volunteer charitable activities in his
local community. (AEs C-I) 
Applicant’s father-in-law (a citizen and resident of Taiwan) passed away in 1991
before Applicant met his wife. (Tr. 80) During his life, Applicant’s father-in-law owned and
operated night clubs, stores, and restaurants, and once served on a local town council.
(Tr. 80-81) Applicant’s surviving mother-in-law and two brothers-in-law are citizens and
residents of Taiwan. (GEs 1 and 2 and 7-8; Tr. 75-76) Applicant’s mother-in-law is not
employed and has no ties or affiliations with any political party or military in Taiwan. She
is a homemaker who assists occasionally in a minor supporting role in her family’s retail
car sales business. (GE 8; Tr. 81)
Applicant’s wife has two brothers, both of whom are citizens and residents of
Taiwan. (GEs 1-8; Tr. 75-76) Applicant’s oldest brother-in-law never married, lives with
his mother, and has no children. (Tr. 79) He served in the Taiwan military over 35 years
ago, before Applicant and his wife met, and has worked as a car salesman for the past
25 years. (AE EE; Tr. 71-72, 77-79) His youngest brother-in-law is married to a
homemaker and has two daughters. (Tr. 86) His youngest brother-in-law once served in
Taiwan’s compulsory military service (over 35 years ago) and currently is a self-
7
employed paralegal. (AE EE; Tr. 82-83) Applicant considers his mother-in-law and
brothers-in-law to be persons of integrity. Each is financially stable and requires no
financial support of Applicant, his wife, or any of his wife’s family members. (Tr. 89, 105)
Neither brother-in-law has any known ties or affiliations with the Taiwan government or
military.
Applicant himself has little contact with his mother-in-law and brothers-in-law in
Taiwan. (Tr. 78-79) He last saw his mother-in-law and oldest brother-in-law in 2008 on
his most recent trip to Taiwan. (GEs 6-7; Tr. 78), and he has not seen his youngest
brother-in-law since 2005. (GE 8; Tr. 83) Neither his mother-in-law nor either of his
brothers-in-law speak English, and Applicant does not speak Chinese. (GEs 1-2 and AE
EE) Applicant’s wife maintains bi-monthly contact with her mother and brothers in
Taiwan (less frequent than in the past) and last visited them (along with her two sons) in
2013. (AE EE; Tr. 83-84, 87) Whatever close bonds of affection and obligation exist
between Applicant’s wife and her Taiwan relatives have never been extended to
Applicant based on his testimony and evidence in the record.
                                                                                 
Applicant’s wife established and maintains a bank account in Taiwan that she set
up for the purpose of having access to money when she and her family travel to Taiwan.
While she never maintains more than a few thousand dollars in the account (currently
$3,500), she has continued to maintain the account in open status. (GEs 6-8) Applicant
assured his wife was in the process of closing the account, but has since changed her
mind.  (AE U; Tr. 73)
By contrast to his wife’s bank balance in her Taiwan account, Applicant and his
wife have considerable assets in the United States. He documented his tax return for
2014 that reported adjusted gross income of $111,000 and his W-2 for 2015 that reflects
gross wages of $96,089. (AEs A-B) Their U.S. assets include two home mortgages that
are close to being paid off, checking accounts, a money market account, retirement
accounts, education savings accounts, and a debit card statement covering an account
in current status. (AEs C-J) 
Applicant also documented excellent credit scores within an 814 to 819 range.
(AE K) Applicant’s evidence is probative of significant U.S. assets owned and controlled
by Applicant and his wife, more than enough to avert any risks of financial pressures on
Applicant’s mother-in-law and brother-in-law by Taiwan government officials.
Endorsements
Managers, supervisors, and former Government officials who have known and
worked with Applicant praised his contributions and trustworthiness. A former program
director for a DOD technology demonstration platform credited Applicant with major
contributions to the platform’s development and execution. (AE Q) She stressed her daily
interaction with Applicant and his demonstrated professionalism and good judgment.
Applicant’s deputy director of research and his direct supervisor characterized
Applicant as a self-starter who consistently inspires trust and confidence. (AE N)  A prior
8
supervisor who is equally familiar with the background of Applicant’s case described him
as a responsible and conscientious co-worker. (AE N) And, his  employer’s facility
security officer (FSO) and coworker credited Applicant with good moral character and
trustworthiness. (AE N)
Taiwan’s Country Status
Taiwan has a rich history that dates back 12 to 15 thousand years.  Dutch and
Spanish colonists claimed the island in the 16  and 17  centuries. See Backgroundth th
Note: Taiwan, supra, at 1-2. Migration from the Chinese mainland over time supplanted
the  aborigine peoples of Taiwan. Japan exerted considerable influence over Taiwan
following China’s ceding of Taiwan to Japan in 1895. (Id.)
Following the end of World War II in 1945, Taiwan reverted to Chinese rule.  Civil
war erupted soon after the reversion between Chiang Kai-Shek’s Kuomintang (KMT)
party and the increasingly influential Chinese Communist Party guided by Mao Zedong.
When the civil war ended in 1949, two million refugees (predominantly nationalists) fled
to Taiwan, where Chiang Kai-Shek established a separate provisional KMT capital in
Taipei. See Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 2. Mao’s victorious Communist party, in
turn, established the People’ s Republic of China (PRC).
For the past half century, Taiwan has demonstrated steady economic
development and today is a major international trading power.  Its accession to the world
Trade Organization (WTO) in 2002 represented a significant achievement and
strengthened its standing in the expanding global economy. See Background Note:
Taiwan, supra, at 3. 
Taiwan has exhibited steady political development as well since its establishment
as an island government. Changes reflect a continuing liberalizing process that
culminated in the tightly contested election of Chen Shui-bian in 2000. See Background
Note: Taiwan, supra, at 4-5. Chen’s Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won major
parliamentary victories in 2000 and again in 2004, enabling Chen to become the first
opposition party candidate to win the presidency. Chen was re-elected in 2004 on a
platform that included a “defensive referendum.” (Id., at 6)  Such referenda have been
historically perceived to be closely linked to the question of Taiwan’s independence. 
Legislative elections in January 2008 produced a decisive majority for the KMT
party over Chen’s DPP. (Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 2-3) In the presidential
election that was held one month later, Ma Ying-jeou prevailed, securing a united
government under KMT control for the first time. (Id.) The January 2012 presidential and
legislative elections were held concurrently (as the result of a constitutional amendment)
and resulted in the reelection of Ma Ying-jeou and renewed KMT legislative control by
the victorious KMT party. 
Today’s Taiwan political system can appropriately be described as a multi-party
democracy under a constitutional umbrella comprising five branches: executive,
legislative, judicial, control and examination.  By all accounts, Taiwan has a good human
9
rights record and has demonstrated respect for the rule of contract in its commercial
relations.
Election results from Taiwan’s recent presidential and legislative elections in
January 2016 add further uncertainty to national espionage threats. Tsai Ing-wen,
opposition leader of the DPP prevailed over the KMT. Dr. Tsai acknowledged Taiwan’s
tenuous relationship with the PRC and pledged her utmost efforts to find mutually
acceptable ways to minimize provocations and surprises. (AE U) 
Explanations abound for the rise of women in Taiwan politics. (Id.) Most scholars
attribute the rise of women in government to evolving global trends in female
involvement in politics. Dr. Tsai’s impressive victory in Taiwan’s 2016 presidential
election promises to have significant affects on future U.S.-Taiwan relations, as well as
Taiwan-PRC relations. (AE U) 
Taiwan’s PRC Relations
The PRC does not recognize Taiwan’s independence, and insists that there is
only “one China” See Administrative Notice, supra, at 3; Background Note: Taiwan,
supra, at 7, and  U.S.-Taiwan Relationship: Overview of Policy Issues, supra. Despite
differences over the PRC’s one China policy, Taiwan and the PRC have enjoyed
increased contacts over the past decade. (Id.) 
Over the past several years, Taiwan has relaxed restrictions on unofficial contacts
with the PRC. With Taiwan’s continued relaxation of its PRC policy regarding unofficial
contacts, cross-strait interactions have grown significantly. 
With increasing contacts between Taiwan and the PRC, cross-strait trade has
grown rapidly over the past 10 years. (Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 7-8) China is
Taiwan’s largest trading partner, and Taiwan is China’s seventh largest. (Id.)  In June
2010, following prolonged negotiations, the two sides signed an Economic Cooperation
Framework Agreement (ECFA), which was designed to liberalize cross-strait trade in
products and services, with the long-term goal of eventually creating an essentially free-
trade regime. The development of semi-official cross-strait relations between Taiwan and
the PRC hopefully will contribute to tension reductions and to an environment conducive
to an eventually peaceful resolution of outstanding differences between the two sides.
(Id., at 8) 
In the current political environment in the aftermath of Taiwan’s recent elections,
and ongoing disputes between the parties in the South China Sea, it is still too early to
predict the direction of cross-strait negotiations between Taiwan and the PRC, and
between the United States, Taiwan, and the PRC. (AE U) Because of the PRC’s long
insistence on Taiwan’s acceptance of the “one China” principle as a requisite to any
jump-starting of negotiations over practical agreements in trade, cultural exchanges, and
other areas of mutual interest, future relations between the two sides remain cloudy at
best.
10
U.S.-Taiwan Relations
In the joint US-PRC communiques of 1972, 1979, and 1982, the United States
announced its recognition of the government of the PRC as the sole government of
China and that there is but one China, of which Taiwan is a part. (Background Note:
Taiwan, supra, at 7) The Joint Communiques confirmed that within this context the
people of the United States will maintain cultural, commercial, and other unofficial
relations with the people of Taiwan.
To implement the joint communique, Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act
(TRA) in April 1979. See Pub. L. No. 96-8, § 2, 93 Stat. 4 (1979)(codified at 22 U.S.C. § §
3301-3316.  President Carter, in turn, signed the legislation into law on April 10, 1979.
Besides providing the legal basis for maintaining the U.S. unofficial relationship with
Taiwan, the TRA reinforced the U.S. commitment to providing defense assistance to
Taiwan. The TRA expressly provides for the continued sale of appropriate defensive
military equipment to Taiwan and declares that peace and stability in the area are in U.S.
interests. See Background Note, Taiwan, supra, at 9-10. 
The TRA also established the American Institute of Taiwan (AIT), a non-profit
corporation designed to provide citizen and consular services similar to those at
diplomatic posts. (Id.) And, even though the United States terminated its Mutual Defense
Treaty with Taiwan following its de-recognition of the latter, it has continued its sale of
appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan. (Id.) While ambiguously written, the
U.S. commitment to Taiwan’s security against cross-strait aggression by the PRC’s
military forces is implicit in the TRA’s coverage of U.S. responsibilities towards Taiwan.
This implicit construction is oft-used to support proponents of a “two China” policy.
To be sure, initial actions of the Bush Administration in 2001 provided cause to
conclude that President Bush abandoned longstanding U.S. policy of “strategic ambiguity”
in favor of a policy that placed a clearer emphasis on Taiwan’s interests at the expense of
the PRC. See Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 8-9; U.S. Relations with Taiwan Fact
Sheet: Foreign Representation, supra. More recent developments, though, reflect the
smoothing of U.S.-PRC relations as a part of the broader war on terrorism.  
Currently, the United States does not support Taiwan independence and opposes
unilateral steps by either side to alter the status quo. (Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at
9-10)  For so long as Taiwan’s national security remains under threat (both veiled and
unveiled) from the PRC, Taiwan can be expected to pursue the development of its military
amidst expectations of military assistance from the United States.  
Stressing self-reliance, Taiwan maintains a large military establishment
(accounting for 2.9 per cent of its gross domestic product). (Background Note: Taiwan,
supra, at 6). Its principal mission is to defend itself against the PRC, which has not
renounced the use of force against Taiwan (Id.) With its unchanged public policy of
maintaining “strategic ambiguity” in its official relations with Taiwan, the United States can
11
be expected to continue its support of Taiwan’s island security with the sale of defensive
military equipment. 
Recently, Congress passed legislation enhancing its oversight of U.S. transfers of
excess Navy vessels to Taiwan. See Major U.S. Arms Sales since 1990, supra; Transfer
of Excess United States Naval Vessels, Public Law 113-276, supra. Arms sales to Taiwan
since 1990 have been substantial. Tables tracking U.S. arms sales between 1990 and
2008 report U.S. sales of transport aircraft, torpedoes, tanks, weapons and ammunition
supply support arrangements, standard air defense missiles, transport aircraft, harpoon
anti-ship missiles, stinger surface-to-air missiles, Kidd-class destroyers, information
distribution systems, control radars, pilot training, and many other classes of military
equipment, training devices, and services. (Id., at 20-23) 
Examples of increased U.S. ties to Taiwan include the designation of its visa
waiver program and the cargo security program between CBT and Taiwan AEO. See
DHS Announces Taiwan’s Designation into Visa Waiver Program, and Taiwan AEO,
Agree to Cargo Security Program Standards, supra. U.S. defense support for Taiwan
shows no signs of waning in the foreseeable future.
Taiwan’s Economic Collection Practices
Based on past reports to Congress, Taiwan is considered one of the most active
collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information. In its 2005 Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, the
Counterintelligence Executive (CE) listed Taiwan as well as the PRC among the most
active collectors based on cited surveys. See Annual Report  to Congress on Foreign
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage-2005, supra, at 12. Specific incidents are
cited in the CE’s report that identify offenders of proprietary information thefts and
attempts to acquire export-restricted products. (Id., at 11) Care must be taken, though, in
relying too heavily on the unverified  information supplied by reporting U.S. firms in the
CE surveys.  
Recent espionage convictions document ongoing collection activities covering theft
of sensitive and proprietary information by and for Taiwan companies. See Administrative
Notice, supra, at 5-6, and press releases covering specific cases involving criminal and
civil charges brought against Taiwan exporters of controlled items and components and
sensitive technology, supra. Summaries of U.S. arms sales over the past 40 years are
covered subject to strengthened security measures put in place. See Summary of Major
U.S. Export Enforcement, Economic Espionage, Trade Secret and Embargo-Related
Cases, supra. Multilateral export control regimes in place are voluntary and not
universally adhered to by member nations.
Stress Points Between Taiwan, the PRC, and the United States
In its Annual Reports to Congress in 2000 and 2005, the National
Counterintelligence Executive described the PRC as a country intent on acquiring and
12
exploiting the knowledge developed by multiples of collection agents: legally, if possible,
and otherwise illegally by espionage. See Administrative Notice, supra, at 5; Annual
Report  to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, supra.
Recent indictments of Chinese citizens for espionage have served to highlight the PRC’s
spying activities in the U.S. (Id.)  Violating  its own 2004 U.S.-China agreement, the PRC
oft-fails to schedule timely end-use inspection visits of dual-use items licensed for export
to the PRC. Better export controls can be effective only if they are multilateral in scope.
Multilateral export controls and arms embargoes, however, do provide additional
insurance against altering the cross-strait military balance that has been long maintained.
(Id., at 7) 
Without effective dual use export controls in place, the PRC can be expected to
acquire dual use technologies with military potential from the United States and Taiwan
through the United States and other source countries. Reported intelligence, though, is
lacking on any Taiwan use of its collection resources in the United States to supply the
PRC with needed military technology (alone or through technology with known dual use
capabilities).
Other stress points between the PRC and Taiwan are reflected in periodic PRC
military exercises in the Taiwan Straits. See Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 6-7.
More frequent U.S.-Taiwan and U.S.-PRC high-level exchanges have the potential to
reduce cross-strait military tensions. See id, at 7 and U.S.-Taiwan Relationship: Overview
of Policy Issues, supra.
Policies
The AGs for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (effective
September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by administrative judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases. These Guidelines require the administrative judge
to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
13
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.”
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Based on the requirement of Exec. Ord 10865 that
all security determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant
14
has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her security clearance eligibility. [S]ecurity
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Applicant is a U.S. citizen whose wife immigrated to the United States from Taiwan
in 1991 on a student visa to pursue her graduate studies in education and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2006. Security concerns arise over the status of
Applicant’s mother-in-law and brothers-in-law, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, a
country historically friendly to the United States, albeit, one with a reported history of
economic collection activities in the United States.
Department Counsel urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s mother-in-
law and brothers-lin-law residing in Taiwan might be subject to undue foreign influence by
Taiwanese government authorities to access classified information in Applicant’s
possession or control. Because Applicant’s in-laws reside in Taiwan where Applicant’s wife
still has an open bank account, they present potential heightened security risks covered by
disqualifying condition  (DC)  ¶ 7(a) of the AGs for foreign influence: “contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” The citizenship/residence
status of these extended family members in Taiwan and retention of a Taiwan bank
account by his wife pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of
undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information under
Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a widowed homemaker who has no known ties or
affiliations with the Taiwan government or military. She occasionally assists with her
family’s retail car sales business and does not rely on any financial support from Applicant
and his wife. Because she speaks no English and cannot communicate verbally with
Applicant who speaks no Chinese, she has had virtually no contact with Applicant, except
indirectly through his wife. Applicant’s last personal contact with his mother-in-law
occurred on his most recent visit to Taiwan in 2008
 Each of Applicant’s brothers-in-law served in the Taiwan military over 35 years ago
and own or operate private businesses in Taiwan. Like their mother, neither brother-in-law
has any known ties or affiliations with Taiwan’s government or military. The facts covering
Applicant’s wife’s Taiwan relatives are distinguishable from the situations reviewed by the
Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 08-09211 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2010) (mother-in-law
worked as a switchboard operator at a Taiwanese military base for almost 30 years), and
in ISCR Case No. 08-04488 at 4-5 (App. Bd. April 23, 2009) (Applicant maintained normal
and routine relationships with her family members and friends residing in Taiwan).
Because Applicant’s mother-in-law participates in her family’s car sales business,
and his brothers-in-law have prior military service (although aged for the most part), some
15
consideration of DC ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person,
group, or country by providing that information,” is warranted as well. While Applicant has
infrequent contact with his mother-in-law and brothers-in-law residing in Taiwan (none
since his most recent visit to Taiwan in 2008), his wife maintains bi-monthly contact with
her relatives.  This could afford him some potential for accessing Taiwan officials who
might be interested in proprietary, sensitive, or even classified information, accessible to
Applicant.
Still, none of Applicant’s extended family members have any known affiliations or
contacts with Taiwan officials currently known to be associated with intelligence or military
organizations interested in collecting proprietary or sensitive information in the United
States. Past reported collection activities by Taiwan government officials have no verifiable
application to Applicant’s in-laws, or by implication to Applicant himself.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime
involved do matter. And the AGs do take into account the country’s demonstrated relations
with the United States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular
relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk.
Taiwan, while reported to target the United States and its companies in the past for
economic and proprietary information, is still a country with no known recent history of
hostage taking or disposition for exerting undue influence against family members to
obtain either classified information or unclassified economic and proprietary data. 
The special relationship that has existed between the United States and Taiwan
over the past half-century has been one marked by mutually reconcilable political and
economic interests. Reports of Taiwan intelligence gathering against U.S. companies are
counterbalanced by Taiwan’s history of friendship and partnership in a defense pact
formalized in 1979. The mutually supportive bonds that have linked Taiwan’s special
relationship with the United States have not been weakened by either the TRA, or the
geopolitical forces that have shaped the U.S.’s evolving relationship with the PRC.
Whatever geopolitical uncertainties exist as the result of the recent presidential and
legislative elections in Taiwan are not likely to change any risk assessments at this time. 
Taiwan remains a friend of the United States and is a country whose democratic
institutions are not incompatible with our own traditions and respect for human rights and
the rule of law. Whatever potential heightened security risks can be imputed as the result of
Taiwan’s being considered an active collector of economic and proprietary data are more
than counterbalanced by Taiwan’s strong allied relationships with the United States in trade
and commerce, its democratic institutions, the historic commitments the United States has
maintained in the defense of Taiwan’s security interests and territorial integrity under the
16
TWA, and Applicant’s own deep-seated commitments to the protection and advancement
of U.S. security interests. 
Minimizing any heightened risk that may exist over Taiwan’s economic collection
practices are Applicant’s infrequent contacts with his wife’s relatives residing in Taiwan. His
wife’s bi-monthly contacts with her relatives in Taiwan, while not infrequent, have never
resulted in any manifest Applicant ties of affection or obligation. Considering the absence of
any Applicant contacts with his wife’s relatives since his 2008 visit to Taiwan and the
significant language barriers that exist between Applicant and his wife’s Taiwan relatives, it
is not surprising to find the absence of any developed feelings of affection and obligation
between Applicant and these relatives. Absent, too, is any evidence of Applicant’s wife’s
making contact (directly or indirectly) with Taiwan officials. From the presented evidence,
his spouse’s relationships with her relatives have not produced any indications of family
member contacts with Taiwan officials, or indicators of any potential conflicts his wife might
have through her family relationships and bank account in Taiwan. 
While there is a presumption of close ties and affection for, or obligation to, the
immediate family members of an applicant’s spouse, this presumption is clearly rebutted,
as it applies to Applicant, by persuasive evidence of Applicant’s distant relationships with
his mother-in-law and brothers-in-law and the absence of any demonstrated opportunity to
develop bonds of affection and/or obligation with his wife’s Taiwan relatives through his
spouse. With his produced probative evidence, Applicant demonstrated convincingly that
he has no emotional attachments, feelings of obligation, or regular or even casual contact
with his wife’s relatives in Taiwan. See ISCR Case No. 11-04980 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 21,
2012) Put another way, Applicant’s spouse’s close relationships with her Taiwan relatives
have never produced close ties, affection, or obligations between Applicant and his
spouse’s relatives. 
 
Under these special circumstances, Applicant may take advantage of  mitigating
conditions (MC)  ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons in that
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government
and the interests of the U.S,” and MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation.” Applicant’s contacts with his mother-in-law and brothers-
in-law have been negligible over the past ten years. Neither of the in-laws speak English,
and Applicant speaks no Chinese. He last saw his mother-in-law and oldest brother-in-law
in 2008 when he visited Taiwan and has not seen his youngest brother-in-law since 2005.
He knows no more about their background than what he provided at his hearing.  
Other mitigating conditions applicable to Applicant’s situation are MC ¶ 8(b): “there is
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant is a U.S.
17
citizen by birth with longstanding commitments to U.S. core values and principles. Applicant
has been employed by his current university employer in various research capacities since
1999 and has no ties or obligations to any foreign person or entity that could possibly
compromise his loyalties or commitments to the United States. 
MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or
organizations from a foreign country,” applies as well to Applicant’s situation.  The record is
clear about Applicant’s prompt reporting to his FSO of his contacts with his university
research colleague from the PRC (while both were in residency in the United States with
Applicant’s U.S. university and while in the PRC in 2005 attending research conferences).
Applicant was similarly vigilant in his reporting of the theft of his university owned laptop
computer by unknown persons during his 2005 trip to China. This computer contained no
classified information, and Applicant was never contacted again by the Chinese official who
discussed the theft with him during Applicant’s hotel stay in the PRC in 2005.
Addressing Applicant’s wife’s Taiwan bank account, this account is of minimal value
compared to the assets Applicant and his wife maintain in the United States, and are not
likely to create any conflicts of interest. These Taiwan bank funds are more than
counterbalanced by the considerable property interests and close family and community
relationships he and his wife have forged in the United States. This small account is highly
unlikely to create any conflict that could be used “effectively to influence, manipulate, or
pressure the individual.” (MC ¶ 8(f)) Based on the information developed in the evidentiary
record, Applicant’s wife’s small bank account in Taiwan that she maintains for travel when
she and her family travel to Taiwan (which is minimal for Applicant), Applicant is entitled to
the full benefit of MC ¶ 8(f).
 
Whole-person assessment also serves to minimize Applicant’s exposure to conflict
of interests with his Taiwan in-laws. Not only has Applicant’s wife become a naturalized
U.S. citizen (in 2006) and received an advanced degree in the United States, but Applicant
himself has devoted his entire professional career to the valued work he has provided to his
university employer for so many years. He is considered highly reliable and trustworthy by
his managers, supervisor, co-workers, and a former DOD official who regularly interacted
with Applicant. None of his managers, supervisor, or coworkers who are familiar with his
clearance issues expressed awareness of any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that
Applicant’s mother-in-law and brother-in-laws might be exposed to in Taiwan.  
Concerning to the Government in a whole-person analysis, even though not alleged
in the SOR, are Applicant’s two security violation incidents in 2010 that resulted in a
warning for the first incident and a write-up for the second one. Applicant received remedial
training as the result of the second incident that was reported to DSS. Since these two
incidents, he has not been cited for any security breach or violation of company guidelines
or policy governing security procedures and practices.  
Also raised in the Appeal Board’s remand as a pertinent consideration in making a
whole-person analysis is the laptop incident that occurred on one of Applicant’s research-
18
related trips to the PRC in 2005. During his stay, some unknown person broke into his hotel
room and stole his university-owned laptop computer. The laptop contained only open
source information and no classified data and was promptly reported by Applicant to both
the hotel’s management and NCIS. The unidentified PRC person he encountered at the
hotel on this 2005 trip to the PRC never tried to reach Applicant since this incident. This
incident did not arise through any fault of Applicant and should not be factored against him
in any overall whole-person analysis.
Based on all of the information compiled in the record, any likelihood of coercion,
pressure, or influence being brought to bear on any of Applicant’s extended family
members would appear to be minimal. By all reasonable accounts of the presented record,
Applicant has few visible conflicts of interest with Taiwan citizens and residents or property
interests in Taiwan that could be at risk to exploitation or compromise by Taiwan
authorities. The only potential exceptions are the still open Taiwan bank account of his wife
and the residency of his mother-in-law and brothers-in-law in Taiwan. Neither the Taiwan
residency of his in-laws nor his wife’s small bank account in Taiwan present any cognizable
security risks that could realistically be exploited by Taiwan authorities.  
Raised doubts about security clearance eligibility should be reasonable ones based
on evidence-based criteria that can be reconciled with principles of commonsense and
substantial evidence. Neither Egan, supra, nor the Directive’s Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b) preclude
the use of reasonable evidence-based criteria when evaluating the record for the existence
of remaining doubts about an applicant’s security clearance worthiness.    
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's having extended
family members in Taiwan and to his wife’s Taiwan bank account are minimal and permit
safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence
attributable to his familial relationships and spousal property interests in Taiwan. Applicant's
ties and interests in his family members with citizenship and residency in Taiwan are by
every reasonable measure mitigated.  Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to
the allegations covered by Guideline B.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):  FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.c:    For  APPLICANT
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
19
