KEYWORD:  Guideline F
DIGEST:  Applicant cites to favorable comments in Department Counsel’s closing argument, for
example Counsel’s view that Applicant has gone a long way toward resolving the Government’s
concerns.  Arguments by parties are not evidence.  In the case before us, the record viewed as a
whole supports the Judge’s decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO:  14-02290.a1
DATE:  01/30/2017
DATE:  January 30, 2017
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02290
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 28, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On November 16, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
has been employed by a Defense contractor since 2002 and is seeking his first DoD security
clearance.  He and his wife have two children from their marriage, and his wife has two from a
previous one.  
Applicant and his wife purchased a house in 2003, the loan for which was secured by a
mortgage.  Three years later, they obtained a $40,000 home equity loan on the house in order to
make an addition to it.  Applicant and his wife have a history of allowing their mortgage and the
equity loan to become 90 days past-due.  
In 2008, Applicant’s wife started a business, and the couple’s income declined substantially. 
In addition, the wife’s younger son moved in with his father, resulting in a loss of child support
payments of about $1,000 a month.  By January 2013, Applicant and his wife were nearly $20,000 
in arrears on their equity loan.  As of January 2014, they had made no payments toward resolving
this delinquency.  This loan was modified in May 2015, with a new payment of nearly $900 a
month, which he found unaffordable.  In January 2016, Applicant engaged a debt resolution
company to negotiate the restructuring of the equity loan.  No payment has been made on this loan
for several months.  In addition to this, Applicant owes $99 for a medical debt.  Moreover, although
this was not alleged in the SOR, Applicant has been 30 days behind on car payments for several
months in 2015 and 2016.1
Applicant’s wife’s business has outgrown its office space and is looking to purchase a
building for its operations.  The business now has seven employees and is becoming the largest of
its kind in the state.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved some allegations in Applicant’s favor, notably one concerning a
delinquent mortgage.  Concerning the equity loan, however, she noted that Applicant has become
delinquent in payments, despite consistent employment for many years and despite his wife’s
business success.  She stated that there was no apparent reason for this delinquency, such as
unforseen circumstances, etc.  She noted the loan modification, but found that the evidence does not
include specifics about trial payments that Applicant may have made before the lender would agree
to the modification.  She stated that, without a repayment plan in place and a record of consistent
payments, she could not conclude that Applicant had mitigated concerns arising from this debt.  She
also resolved the $99 medical bill adversely to Applicant.
1The missed car payments were not alleged in the SOR.  Acknowledging that non-alleged conduct can be
considered for certain limited purposes, the Judge stated that she was considering them for  Applicant’s judgment and
his case for mitigation.  Decision at 4, n.1.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07219 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012).   
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant has not made sufficient
progress in resolving the equity loan, noting that it was 120 days past due as of February 2016.2 She
stated that promises to pay debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of financially
responsible behavior.  She also noted the late payments on Applicant’s automobile loan and that
neither Applicant nor his wife could explain their failure to make timely payments on their various
obligations.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence that he believes is favorable to him, such as his efforts to address
the equity loan, circumstances attending his wife’s business start-up, etc.  Applicant has not rebutted
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 15-02854 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2016).  Neither has he shown that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016).  
Applicant cites to favorable comments in Department Counsel’s closing argument, for
example Counsel’s view that Applicant has gone a long way toward resolving the Government’s
concerns.  Tr. at 78.  Arguments by parties are not evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03392 at
2, n.3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2015).  In the case before us, the record viewed as a whole supports the
Judge’s decision.  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
2The record shows that the hearing took place on March 23, 2016.  Tr. at 1.  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan     
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
