 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 14-03136 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Rosario Mario F. Rizzo, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law held prominent positions in a foreign transitional 
government in 2011. He currently heads a commission of significant importance to the 
democratization and stabilization of the country. Applicant has had no contact with this 
brother-in-law since September 2010, and he has longstanding ties to the United States. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a 
security concern under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and explaining why it was 
unable to grant or continue a security clearance to Applicant. The DOD CAF acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant filed a pro se response to the SOR on June 4, 2015, and he requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
 
 2 
Appeals (DOHA). On February 26, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a 
hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. On February 29, 2016, I scheduled a 
hearing for March 22, 2016. 
 
At the hearing, counsel for Applicant entered his appearance. Six Government 
exhibits (GEs 1-6) and two Applicant exhibits (AEs A-B) were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on March 31, 
2016. Additionally, the Government requested that I take administrative notice of 
several facts pertinent to Libya. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Libya, as set forth in an Administrative Notice request dated January 27, 
2016. The Government’s request was based on several U.S. government publications 
referenced in the document.1 Applicant was provided the Internet addresses where he 
could access the publications. Counsel for Applicant verified that he accessed the 
documents from the Internet before the hearing. 
 
Pursuant to my obligation to take administrative notice of the most current 
political conditions in evaluating Guideline B concerns (see ISCR Case No. 05-11292 
(App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007)), I informed the parties of my intent to take administrative 
notice, subject to the reliability of the source documentation and the relevance and 
materiality of the facts proposed. Applicant filed no objections to the facts set forth in the 
Government’s Administrative Notice request and did not submit a request to 
administratively notice other facts.  
 
 Some of the reports relied on by the Government were updated after Applicant’s 
hearing.2 With that caveat, the facts administratively noticed are set forth below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s brother-in-law heads a commission in Libya 
after having held high-ranking positions for its transitional governing authority (SOR ¶ 
1.a). In a detailed response, Applicant admitted that the information alleged was 
“generally” true, but he also indicated that he does not have a close relationship with his 
                                                 
1 
The Government’s request for administrative notice was based on four publications from the U.S. State 
Department: a Travel Warning dated September 16, 2015; a country information report about Libya dated 
July 20, 2015; a press statement of December 17, 2015; and a human rights report for 2014 concerning 
Libya. Source information for the Administrative Notice request also came from a November 21, 2014 
investigative report of the U.S. House of Representatives and on a threat assessment of the U.S. 
Intelligence Committee dated February 26, 2015. 
  
2 
For example, the State Department Travel Warning that was in effect as of Applicant’s hearing was 
recently replaced by a travel warning issued on June 9, 2016. The State Department issued its human 
rights reports for 2015, including Libya, on April 13, 2016. 
 
 3 
brother-in-law, who has been married to his sister for over 35 years. After considering 
the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old college graduate, who has been employed by a 
federally-funded research and development center since January 2013. (GEs 1, 3; AE 
B; Tr. 23.) Applicant was initially granted a DOD secret security clearance in 
approximately September 1996 for his duties with another defense contractor. His 
clearance was upgraded to top secret around August 2001. Due to a lack of work, his 
services were contracted out to another company in the defense industry in November 
2004. In May 2005, he became a direct hire of that company, and his clearance was 
transferred. His clearance was administratively downgraded to the secret level before 
November 2012, when he was laid off during a reduction in force. (GEs 1, 3; Tr. 25-27, 
29, 51.) Applicant had some temporary work in contract administration for another 
company before starting his present employment. (Tr. 28-30.) He currently holds a 
secret clearance for classified technical presentations, but he does not access classified 
information on a daily basis. (Tr. 24-25.) 
 
Applicant is the second oldest of nine children born in the United States to a U.S. 
native-born mother and U.S. naturalized father. Applicant and his spouse have owned 
their residences in the United States since April 1996. They married in June 2004 and 
bought their current home around November 2006. They have a 19-year-old son. (GEs 
1, 3.) As of May 2009, they owned a wine and spirit store, which they sold in October 
2013. (GEs 1, 3; Tr. 50.) Applicant has no foreign assets or property interests. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant has two brothers and five sisters. A brother died before Applicant 
applied to update his security clearance eligibility. (GE 1.) His elder sister (sister #1) is 
an attorney, who lives in the United States. (AE A; Tr. 33.) Sister #1’s spouse (SOR ¶ 
1.a) was born in Libya and studied at a university there before fleeing the country in 
1973. He was stripped of his citizenship and sentenced to death in absentia. After 
immigrating to the United States, he earned his master’s degree in 1978, married 
Applicant’s sister #1 in 1980, earned his doctorate degree in 1983, and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. From 1985 until March 2011, Applicant’s brother-in-law was a 
senior lecturer at a public university in the United States. (GEs 3, 4; Tr. 42-43.) 
 
In March 2011, Applicant’s brother-in-law returned to Libya at the request of its 
transitional government. (Tr. 42.) He served in a couple of high-ranking positions in its 
government in 2011 and founded a political party in 2012, despite pressures from 
extremists opposed to their agenda. In 2014, he was elected to his current position of 
some prominence in Libya.3 (GEs 3-6; Tr. 46-48.) Applicant’s sister #1 remained in the 
United States with their four children. (AE A; Tr. 36, 43.) Applicant spoke to his then 
security officer in 2011 about his brother-in-law’s move to Libya because he thought it 
                                                 
3 
According to a May 2015 news article (GE 5), Applicant’s brother-in-law serves on one of the only 
institutions with bipartisan support. Applicant testified that he read an article in February 2016 about a 
court decision in Libya indicating that it may be illegal for Applicant’s brother-in-law to hold his position 
because he has “a dual citizenship,” like so many expatriates in power now, who established citizenship 
in another country and have since returned to Libya. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 4 
could be an issue. Applicant does not believe that his former employer filed a report with 
the DOD about his brother-in-law. (Tr. 30.) 
 
In March 2013, Applicant informed his current employer about his brother-in-
law’s residency in Libya, his past high-ranking position in Libya for a month in 2011, and 
his brother-in-law’s then current position as chairman of a political party in Libya. (GE 2; 
Tr. 30.) On April 25, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant reported that he had contact 
only twice with his brother-in-law in the last seven years, both times in person. Applicant 
saw his brother-in-law at a funeral for Applicant’s nephew in August 2010 and at a 
milestone birthday party for Applicant’s father in September 2010. (Tr. 50.) Applicant 
denied any other contact, including by email or telephone with his brother-in-law in the 
last seven years. Applicant could not recall when his brother-in-law became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. He explained that his brother-in-law had been recruited in 
March 2011 by the then governing authority in Libya to assist in forming democratic 
institutions in the country. Applicant advised that his brother-in-law was still in Libya but 
that his sister #1 still lives in the United States. Applicant stated that he has not 
discussed work or government issues with his brother-in-law. (GE 3.)  
 
Applicant had a “pretty close” relationship to sister #1 in high school and while 
she was in college. Applicant visited sister #1 and her husband in late 1982 or early 
1983 and then in 1983 or 1984. During Applicant’s first visit in 1982 or 1983, his brother-
in-law shared his political views with him. Applicant was led to understand from his 
mother that his brother-in-law was involved with an expatriate organization with the aim 
of overthrowing the dictatorship in power in Libya. Applicant began distancing himself 
from his family, including sister #1, around 1984 or 1985. Even so, he visited his sibling 
and her family again in April 2002. (Tr.  33-34, 42.) 
 
Most of Applicant’s contact with his sister #1 in the last ten years has been 
through social media. (Tr. 35.) Applicant is closest to his youngest sister, and he 
communicates with his other siblings, including sister #1, usually through his youngest 
sister. (Tr. 36, 57.) Applicant’s youngest sister is “pretty close” to their sister #1. (Tr. 61.) 
However, Applicant and sister #1 have had email contact to share information about the 
health and care of their parents over the years. (AE A.) Applicant and sister #1 were last 
together in September 2015, when their father turned 95, and in January 2016, when 
their mother died. (Tr. 36, 44-45.) Sister #1’s husband did not attend the funeral, 
although he telephoned Applicant’s father to extend his condolences. (Tr. 44.) Applicant 
follows sister #1’s daughter and daughter’s husband on Instagram. This niece and her 
spouse stayed with Applicant for a week in late September 2010. (AE A; Tr. 37, 46, 60.) 
 
Neither Applicant nor his sister #1 has traveled to Libya. (Tr. 49.) He does not 
intend, and to his knowledge his sister also does not intend, any travel to that country. 
(Tr. 66.) His sister #1’s sons went to Libya to see their father in 2011. Sister #1’s elder 
son has seen his father in Europe as well. Applicant had in-person contact with this 
nephew at his father’s birthday party in September 2015 and at his mother’s funeral in 
 
 5 
January 2016, but he does not have contact with this nephew on a regular basis. (Tr. 
65.) 
 
Applicant has had no contact with sister #1’s husband since September 2010. 
(Tr. 49.) Applicant obtains information about his brother-in-law indirectly from sister #1 
through his youngest sister; from the Internet by Rich Site Summary (RSS) feed set up 
for his brother-in-law’s name; or through a Twitter search. Applicant explained his 
rationale as follows: 
 
I also have it set up in Twitter as a search, just because I wait to see, 
should something ever happen to him. I want to know about it. And when I 
say something happen to him, one, it’s either he becomes a government 
official, and you know, that obviously affects me. But also should 
something negative happen to him, kidnapping or death. And its’s always 
a concern in our family, but we don’t dwell on it. It’s sort of a fact of life for 
him, and it’s just our security risk. But some of that has also been, you 
know, Googling and finding out he’s met with U.S. officials, so . . . (Tr. 57.) 
 
Applicant also testified that he might inquire of his youngest sister about the truth of 
Internet information about their brother-in-law. He rarely asks about their brother-in-
law’s location or activities. (Tr. 61.) 
 
Applicant denies that he could be unduly influenced or coerced to take action 
against the United States because of his relationships to his brother-in-law or sister #1 
or their children. (Tr. 40-41.) When asked how he would react if sister #1 was to 
become a hostage, Applicant responded that he did not anticipate that situation 
occurring; that his sister understands the risk; and that he takes his security clearance 
and the safety of the United States very seriously. (Tr. 53.) If approached for classified 
information, he would report the contact to security personnel at work. (Tr. 54.) As for 
any concern about the recent increase in terrorism in Libya, Applicant responded: 
 
It’s — it’s a concern in the sense that something could happen to him, and 
that would affect my sister and her children. You know, I mean they love 
him. Most of us do not love him. He’s done things that most of us don’t 
particularly like. (Tr. 63.) 
 
Applicant denied it would affect his work were his brother-in-law to be taken hostage, 
although he acknowledged that it would “certainly add some drama in the family.” (Tr. 
66.) 
 
Work References 
 
 Applicant’s manager between December 1999 and May 2005 found Applicant to 
be an excellent worker and trustworthy in carrying out his duties in program finance. 
After Applicant left the company, they stayed in contact through their association with 
 
 6 
the local chapter of a national contract management organization. Applicant’s former 
manager considers Applicant to be of good character. (AE B.) 
 
 Applicant did an exceptional job for his next employer as well. A program 
manager familiar with Applicant’s work for several years between May 2005 and 
November 2012 described Applicant as reliable and a strong team member. He knew of 
no security deficiencies in relation to Applicant. Likewise, Applicant’s direct manager for 
over five years during that time would not hesitate in recommending Applicant. 
Applicant performed his duties in a timely and professional manner, giving his then 
supervisor no reason to question his dedication or trustworthiness. (AE B.) 
 
 Co-workers in Applicant’s present employment have described him as 
conscientious and professional. Applicant manages consultant-type agreements that 
involve personally identifiable information requiring protection in accord with company 
procedures. Applicant is well versed in security-related procedures, and he executes his 
responsibilities appropriately on a daily basis. His current co-workers indicate that they 
know of no security infractions or violations involving Applicant. (AE B.) 
 
I take administrative notice that Libya is a parliamentary democracy with a 
temporary constitutional declaration allowing for the exercise of political, civil, and 
judicial rights.  An outbreak of major political violence in 2014 led to the loss of central 
government control over much of the country’s territory and the emergence of rival 
administrations. Military forces and militias affiliated with both the internationally-
recognized government and its opponents committed numerous serious human rights 
abuses. Militias affiliated with both sides in the conflict operated without restraint or 
accountability. They regularly killed civilians; targeted, kidnapped, or killed political 
figures, journalists, and activists and their families; and damaged national infrastructure 
and diplomatic facilities. Impunity was a severe and pervasive problem in that the 
government failed to take steps to investigate, prosecute, and punish officials who 
committed abuses and violations, whether in the security forces or elsewhere in the 
government. As a consequence of the government’s failure to maintain the rule of law, 
terrorist and extralegal armed groups operated in a security vacuum. 
 
U.S. Embassy operations were suspended in Libya in July 2014 because of the 
ongoing violence. In September 2015, the Department of State warned U.S. citizens 
against all travel to the country and recommended the immediate departure of U.S. 
citizens in Libya because of the unpredictable and unstable security situation. Many 
military-grade weapons were in the hands of private individuals, U.S. and United 
Nations (UN)-designated terrorists, and other armed groups. Crime levels, including of 
kidnapping, remained high in many parts of the country. Violent extremist groups made 
several specific threats against U.S. government officials, U.S. citizens, and U.S. 
interests. Hotels frequented by Westerners had been caught in the crossfire between 
armed groups. Most international airports were closed with flights in and out of Libya 
cancelled without warning. In December 2015, after a year of UN-brokered dialogue, the 
country’s political leaders agreed to form a unified government. In June 2016, the U.S. 
State Department renewed its warning against all travel by U.S. citizens to Libya 
 
 7 
because of ongoing security instability and threats against U.S. interests by extremist 
terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, aka ISIS). 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 8 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is articulated in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The husband of Applicant’s elder sister moved to Libya at the request of its 
transitional government in March 2011. He held two high-ranking positions for its 
governing authority in 2011 and founded a political party in 2012. In 2014, he was 
elected to a prominent position on a nonpartisan committee that has a very important 
task in the democratization and political stabilization of the country. AG ¶ 7(a) is 
implicated if contacts create a heightened risk of foreign influence: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of 
the family ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are 
relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government 
coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated with, or 
dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign 
government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
As reported by the U.S. State Department, there is a heightened risk of terrorism 
in Libya. Libya has a poor human rights record and government authorities lack control 
over much of the country. The State Department warns U.S. citizens against traveling to 
Libya because of the violent extremist activity in Libya, including by groups such as ISIL 
 
 9 
that expressly target U.S. citizens and U.S. interests. Moreover, Applicant’s brother-in-
law’s high profile in Libya significantly heightens the risk. Although it has been several 
years since he held a high-ranking position for the Libyan government, he continues to 
exert some influence through his position on a nonpartisan commission of significant 
importance to Libya’s stability as a parliamentary democracy. 
 
Yet, there is nothing about Applicant’s contacts with his brother-in-law that would 
implicate AG ¶ 7(a). Applicant has had limited contact with his brother-in-law over the 
years. He last saw his brother-in-law in September 2010. There has been no contact 
between them since his brother-in-law’s 2011 move to Libya. Applicant persuasively 
testified that he does not have a close personal relationship with his brother-in-law. 
Applicant testified that his brother-in-law has done some things that he and other family 
members dislike, although he did not elaborate in that regard. 
 
The risk of undue foreign influence cannot be adequately assessed without 
consideration of Applicant’s ties to his brother-in-law through his sister #1, however. 
Even though Applicant usually obtains information about his brother-in-law from his 
youngest sister, the Internet, or social media, he described his relationship with sister #1 
as “pretty close.” He saw sister #1 at a niece’s funeral in August 2010, at celebrations 
for their father’s 90th and 95th birthdays in September 2010 and September 2015, and at 
their mother’s funeral in January 2016. They have had some contact by email over the 
years. Applicant’s sister #1 presumably has a positive relationship with her spouse, 
despite their physical separation since March 2011. While sister #1 has never traveled 
to Libya, two of her children went to Libya to see their father. There exists a potential 
vulnerability of undue foreign influence indirectly through his sister #1’s spousal 
relationship. Both AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶ 7(b) apply. AG ¶ 7(b) provides: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Given the high-profile positions that Applicant’s brother-in-law has held in Libya 
since 2011 and the Libyan government’s ineffective control over extremist terrorist 
groups, AG ¶ 8(a) cannot reasonably apply in mitigation. AG ¶ 8(a) provides:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
 
Applicant’s personal contacts with his brother-in-law have been so limited over 
the years to be reasonably characterized as infrequent. However, it is difficult to fully 
mitigate the security concerns under AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
 
 10 
for foreign influence or exploitation,” because of the family ties. Contacts are not casual 
when they are between family members and occur at such important family events as 
milestone birthdays and funerals. 
 
Applicant has no allegiance or sense of loyalty to Libya. A lifelong U.S. native 
citizen, he has no obligation to Libya or financial asset in Libya that could present a 
conflict of interest. Yet, Applicant admitted to setting up an RSS feed and Twitter search 
for his brother-in-law by name because he wants to know should something happen to 
his brother-in-law because it would affect sister #1 and her children. Applicant’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to his sister #1 and her family is not sufficiently minimal to satisfy 
the first prong of AG ¶ 8(b), which provides: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has long acknowledged that “people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, 
such as a family member.” See ISCR Case No. 08-10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009.) 
There is little likelihood that his sister would directly be threatened as long as she 
remains in the United States. There is no evidence that she plans to travel to Libya to 
see her husband. The salient issue in this case is what Applicant would do if placed in 
the untenable position of having to choose between his family and his security 
responsibilities should his brother-in-law become a target of pressure, coercion, or 
physical harm. Applicant denies that he could be coerced to act contrary to U.S. 
interests, and he presented persuasive evidence of longstanding ties to the United 
States that under AG ¶ 8(b) minimize the security risk. Applicant, his spouse, and their 
19-year-old son are U.S. resident citizens. Applicant has no foreign financial assets, 
while he has owned homes in the United States since 1996. He has worked in the U.S. 
defense industry for over 20 years with a security clearance and has no record of any 
security infractions or violations. He disclosed his brother-in-law’s foreign government 
involvement to security personnel. Applicant understands that the risk of undue foreign 
influence cannot completely be discounted because of his sister #1’s husband. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).4 Furthermore, in weighing these whole-person factors in a foreign influence 
case, the Appeal Board has held that: 
                                                 
4
 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
 
 11 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still 
pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that 
an applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to 
classified information. Even good people can pose a security risk because 
of facts and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 
01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
Applicant had no say in his brother-in-law’s decision to move to Libya to assist in 
the establishment of democratic institutions. What he can control is his response to the 
security risk that his sister #1 and her spouse have accepted and extended to family 
members. When asked what he would do if placed in the untenable position of having to 
choose between the health and safety of sister #1 and his security obligations, Applicant 
indicated that he would notify security personnel at work. The Government need not 
wait to see what Applicant would do in that regard before concluding that an 
unacceptable security risk exists. However, Applicant has shown that he can be 
counted on to fulfill his security responsibilities. He has an unblemished record of 
compliance with security regulations. His unrebutted testimony is that he notified his 
former employer in 2011 when his brother-in-law moved to Libya. He self-reported to his 
current employer in March 2013 that his brother-in-law lives in Libya, held a high-
ranking governmental position in Libya in 2011, and was currently chairman of a political 
party in Libya. Past and present co-workers have no concerns about Applicant’s 
trustworthiness or reliability in handling classified or sensitive information. After 
considering all the facts and circumstances, I find it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
  
                                                                                                                                                             
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
 12 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
