                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-04458
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to file his income tax returns as required between 2008 and
2011. He recently completed filing of all his past-due returns but did not provide
adequate justification for waiting almost five years to do so. His request for continued
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 17, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew his eligibility for access to classified
information. After reviewing the ensuing background investigation, Department of
Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.1
On December 29, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts that raise security concerns about financial considerations (Guideline F).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without a
hearing. On February 24, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
1
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR.3
Applicant received the FORM on March 8, 2016, and timely provided additional
information in response to the FORM (Response to FORM). The record closed on April
8, 2016. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged Applicant failed to file his federal
income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2011 (SOR 1.a); that he failed to file his
State A income tax return for the 2008 tax year (SOR 1.b); that he failed to file his State
B income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2010 (SOR 1.c); and that he failed to
file his State C income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2011 (SOR 1.d). (FORM,
Item 1)
Applicant denied the SOR 1.b allegation because the state in question does not
have a personal income tax. He is correct. SOR 1.b is resolved for Applicant.
In his SOR response, dated February 1, 2016, Applicant admitted the remaining
allegations, but averred that he had filed all of his past-due returns, except for the 2008
tax year, the same day he answered the SOR. In response to the FORM, Applicant
provided documents from a tax preparation service that support his claim that he has
filed all of his past-due returns for 2009 through 2011. (FORM, Item 1; Response to
FORM)
Applicant is 67 years old. He served in the United States Army until February
1984 after graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point in June
1971. He was honorably discharged. Applicant has worked in the defense industry since
January 1988 and has held a security clearance throughout his career. (FORM, Item 2)
Applicant has relocated several times for employment. He lived in State A from
October 2001 until moving to State B in December 2008. He lived there until December
2010, when he moved to State C. He has always been required to file annual federal
income tax returns, regardless of where he lived. He was also required to file annual
income tax returns for income earned in States B and C. In his 2012 EQIP, Applicant
disclosed that, as alleged in SOR 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d, he had not filed his federal or state
income tax returns between 2008 and 2011. He attributed his conduct to a combination
of two surgeries, relocations, and difficulty accessing his tax records. He also claimed
that he did not timely file because he knew he would receive refunds for each tax year
at issue. (FORM, Items 1 and 2)
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in June 2013. In relevant
part, he discussed his failure to file his tax returns between 2008 and 2011. Again, he
attributed his failure to file to his surgeries, lack of records, and job relocations. At the
very end of the summary of investigation provided at FORM Item 3 is the following: “The
subject has completed 4506-T for tax years 2008 - 2011. Those. . .”  4506-T refers to a4
request from the IRS for a transcript of one’s tax status and filing history. The record
does not reflect what, if anything, Applicant did with any information he received from
the IRS. It is clear that he did not file any past-due returns for another 32 months after
the interview. As to the returns he filed in February 2016, records show he overpaid his
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included three exhibits (Items 1 - 3) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
 The text may have continued on another page but it was not provided. 4
2
taxes for those years and would have received refunds, as he claimed. But he has yet
to file his 2008 returns. (FORM, Items 1 and 3; Response to FORM)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls7
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such9
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.10
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
3
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information supports the SOR allegations. The resulting security
concern about the facts established by the Government is expressed, in relevant part, at
AG ¶ 18:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, Applicant’s conduct requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). None of the mitigating conditions at AG
20 apply. Applicant has yet to fully comply with his tax reporting obligations. Also, even
if he had filed all of his returns, his failure to act for at least four years after submitting
his EQIP undermines any sense that he has complied promptly or in good faith. Indeed,
Applicant did not act until it was made clear to him through the SOR that he might lose
his clearance because of his failure to file. 
Lastly, Applicant’s reliance on the fact that he would receive refunds for the tax
years at issue is irrelevant. The issue here is not whether Applicant might owe money to
the Government; rather, the question is asked if he can be relied on to comply with rules
and regulations even when doing so may be inconvenient or not in his self interest.
Applicant’s inaction in this regard shows he does not have the reliability or judgment
required of one in whom the Government might entrust its sensitive information.
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his failure to comply with
basic income tax reporting obligations.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant did not carry his burden of presenting
sufficient information to refute or mitigate the security concerns raised by his failure to
comply with his income tax reporting obligations. Without such information, doubts
about his suitability for access to classified information remain. Because protection of
the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
4
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s security
clearance is revoked.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
5
