1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-05669
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Although Applicant’s mortgage delinquencies were caused by circumstances
beyond his control, he provided no evidence of any steps that he has taken to address
them.  Clearance is denied. 
 Statement of the Case
On February 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006. On March 11, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting the
allegations and requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 11,
2016.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 14, 2016, scheduling the hearing
for October 26, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, I considered
Applicant and his wife’s decision to relocate was influenced by the fact that Applicant’s job was increasingly1
becoming unstable, as his employer had implemented several layoffs, and appeared headed for bankruptcy.
(Tr. 15-16)
2
 
Applicant’s testimony, and I received three Government exhibits (GE 1 - GE 3), and six
Applicant exhibits (AE A - AE F). DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 31,
2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old married man with one child, age 15. He is a high
school graduate and has earned some college credits. Since January 2014, Applicant
has worked for a defense contractor as a system administrator and an integration
engineer. (Tr. 14) 
Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to his supervisor, he is a
superb technician who “has a knack for getting ground control systems to work where
others have failed.” (AE B) His reputation extends beyond his employer, as other
defense contractors have specifically requested his involvement in collaborative
partnerships. (AE B)
In 2006, Applicant and his wife purchased a home for $400,000. (Tr. 18) Several
years later, Applicant’s wife was informed that her job was being transferred to another
state. Applicant and his wife did not want to relocate because they were $60,000
underwater on their mortgage, and anticipated problems selling their home. (Tr. 25)
Consequently, Applicant’s wife decided to look for another job in the area where they
were living. 
Applicant’s wife’s efforts to find another job with a comparable salary were
unsuccessful. Subsequently, she decided to stay with her job and relocate.  In March1
2014, Applicant and his wife, in an effort to facilitate the sale of their home before the
relocation, pursued an option to short sell the home. (GE 3 at 2) They stopped paying
the mortgage payments, shortly after initiating the short sale process after being
advised that one of the criteria for short selling a home is to be behind on the mortgage
payments. (Tr. 20) Before then, they had been current on the mortgage payments. Their
efforts to short sell the home were unsuccessful, as a buyer offered to purchase the
home, and the bank rejected the deal. (Tr. 16) 
Unable to sell their home, Applicant and his wife moved in June 2014, as
planned. They could not balance the rental payment on their new home with the
mortgage payment on their previous home. Consequently, by May 2015, the primary
mortgage delinquency increased to $40,000 (SOR subparagraph 1.a), and a home
equity credit line was delinquent in the amount of $28,000 (SOR subparagraph 1.b). 
Applicant has not made any payments towards the satisfaction of these
mortgages since relocating because he does not earn enough income to pay both
3
 
mortgages. (Tr. 21) The bank has initiated foreclosure proceedings. (GE 3 at 2)
Applicant does not know whether the home has been foreclosed.
Applicant and his wife earn approximately $130,000 annually. (Tr. 22) They have
approximately three to four thousand dollars in savings. (Tr. 22) Other than the
outstanding mortgages, Applicant and his wife have no other delinquent debt. They are
able to meet their current expenses, but not able to save much money. (Tr. 23)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Applicant’s delinquent debt triggers the application of  AG ¶ 19(a), “inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.” 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
4
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debt.
Applicant did not incur his delinquent debt as a result of profligate spending or
foolish real estate investing. Instead, he experienced financial difficulties when he
relocated and was unable to sell his home, which at the time of the move, was
approximately $60,000 underwater. These circumstances were beyond his control,
triggering the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b). 
Applicant contends that he does not know the status of the foreclosure and that
he does not have enough disposable income to begin paying the mortgage delinquency.
He provided no evidence, however, of any efforts to contact the mortgagor, either to
inquire into the status of the foreclosure, or to negotiate a payment plan. Ultimately, it is
the Applicant’s burden of proof to establish mitigation. Under these circumstances, I
cannot conclude that he has carried this burden. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) partially
applies, but that none of the other mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered Applicant’s strong employment references, together with the whole-
person factors, as listed above. Ultimately, the mitigating information such as the strong
character references and the surrounding circumstances of Applicant’s financial
problems, were not sufficient to overcome the negative security ramifications of his
unresolved mortgage delinquencies.
The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time occurrence, but is
based on current disqualifying and mitigating conditions. Under the Applicant’s current
5
 
circumstances, a clearance is not recommended, but should he be afforded an
opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future, he may well demonstrate
persuasive evidence of his security worthiness.
 
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
