 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-01095 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
her circumstances and past conduct. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations, personal conduct, alcohol 
consumption, and criminal conduct guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR and 
initially requested a decision on the administrative (written) record. She subsequently 
requested a hearing to establish her eligibility for access to classified information.2 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 Applicant’s request for a hearing and continued sponsorship for a clearance are attached to the record 
as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I and II.  
 
2 
 
 
 On June 9, 2016, per Applicant’s request, a hearing was held to allow her to 
present evidence, both testimonial and documentary, addressing the security concerns 
at issue.3 At hearing, Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were 
admitted into the administrative record without objection (Exhibits 1 – 8 and A – H). 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted additional documentary evidence, which were 
also admitted into the record without objection (Exhibits I – L). The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on August 12, 2016, and the record closed on November 9, 2016.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old college graduate, employed as a systems 
administrator by a federal contractor. She and her husband of 12 years recently 
separated. She is the primary caretaker of her three minor children, and is not receiving 
spousal or child support from her husband. She has been with her current employer 
since 2011, and earns a yearly salary of approximately $70,000. She has held a 
security clearance for the past six years. She submitted a security clearance application 
in 2014, seeking to maintain her eligibility for a clearance 
 
Financial5 
 
 Applicant started experiencing financial trouble in about 2011. She took an early 
withdrawal from her 401(k) retirement account and did not set aside a sufficient amount 
to pay the resulting tax liability. She incurred a sizeable federal income tax debt for the. 
She entered into an installment agreement with the IRS and presented documentation 
reflecting monthly payments dating back to June 2011. The IRS documentation also 
reflects that Applicant withheld far more in taxes than owed in 2014 and 2015, resulting 
in refunds that were applied against the tax debt. The documentation further reflects 
that Applicant has reduced her federal tax debt from over $30,000 to a current balance 
of less than $20,000.  
 
 Applicant continued experiencing financial problems in 2012, when her husband 
changed jobs and their income decreased. IRS documentation reflects that from 2011 to 
2015, their income declined by nearly $60,000. Her husband, who ran the family’s 
finances, stopped paying the mortgage and used the money to pay other bills. Months 
later, Applicant saw a collection notice from the bank and became aware that her 
husband had stopped paying the mortgage.  
 
                                                          
3 Prehearing correspondence was marked and attached to the record as App. Exh. III and V. The hearing 
was originally scheduled for late June, but was twice rescheduled to accommodate Applicant. The case 
management order (CMO) was marked and attached to the record as App. Exh. IV. 
 
4 The original deadline to submit post-hearing matters was September 8, 2016, but at Applicant’s request 
it was extended. 
 
5 The pertinent portions of the record relied upon for the information relayed in this section can be located 
at: Tr. 21-47, 55-60; Exhibits 5 – 8, A – D, I – M. 
 
3 
 
 
In the fall of 2012, Applicant and her husband filed a joint Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition to save the family home from foreclosure. They made the $2,000 monthly 
bankruptcy plan payments for about six months while continuing to negotiate a loan 
modification. They voluntarily moved to dismiss the Chapter 13 after the bank agreed to 
a mortgage modification. The bankruptcy was dismissed in August 2013.  
 
Applicant’s marriage deteriorated as her family’s financial situation spiraled 
downward. In approximately November 2015, Applicant and her husband formally 
separated. Applicant retained the family home, but was unable to afford the monthly 
mortgage payments and other expenses on her income alone. The bankruptcy 
documents reflect that Applicant’s husband was the primary breadwinner, with a 
monthly income nearly three times the amount she earns as a federal contractor. 
Applicant does not receive financial support from her estranged husband. She is the 
sole source of financial support for the three children. 
 
Applicant got a roommate to help pay the mortgage. She got a second job when 
the roommate moved out. She submitted documentation reflecting her successful efforts 
in negotiating a new loan modification and IRS installment agreement. Applicant has 
responsibly addressed two of the major SOR debts, the mortgage delinquency and 
federal tax debt referenced in SOR 1.d and 1.n.  
 
 Applicant submitted her separation agreement, which corroborates her testimony 
that her estranged husband is responsible for the car debt and state tax debt referenced 
in SOR 1.k and 1.o. She presented sufficient evidence to support her dispute regarding 
these two SOR debts.  
 
Applicant contacted the overdue creditor for the debts referenced in SOR 1.e – 
1.i, which total approximately $4,700. She worked out a monthly payment plan and 
presented documentation reflecting plan payments. She also presented documentation 
of having paid the $1,300 debt referenced in SOR 1.b. She credibly testified about 
contacting the creditor holding the $75 medical debt referenced in SOR 1.c and was 
informed the account had a $0 balance. She is working with her insurance company to 
resolve the charged-off amount listed in SOR 1.l for her former car. Applicant addressed 
the consumer-related debts referenced in SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.e – 1.i, 1.k, and 1.o. The 
remaining two SOR debts, which represent charged-off accounts and are listed in SOR 
1.j and 1.m, remain unresolved.  
 
Security Clearance Application6 
 
 Applicant was asked to list any adverse financial information on the 2014 security 
clearance application (SCA). She reported the 2012 bankruptcy filing and its 
subsequent dismissal. She did not list each of the delinquent debts delineated in the 
bankruptcy petition as debts that were over 120 days past-due on the SCA. Shortly after 
submitting the SCA, Applicant freely discussed her financial situation and past-due 
debts with a security clearance background investigator. She genuinely believed that by 
                                                          
6 Tr. 27-31; Exhibits 1 – 2. 
 
4 
 
 
reporting the bankruptcy she had properly responded to the questions in the SCA 
asking about her financial record. She also was under the mistaken impression the 
$10,000 to 12,000 in payments that she and her husband had submitted into the 
Chapter 13 plan had been used by the bankruptcy trustee to satisfy her delinquent 
debts, except those tied to her mortgage, taxes, and cars. Applicant credibly testified 
that she did not intend to deceive or misrepresent to the Government about her financial 
situation when she submitted her SCA.  
 
Alcohol-Related Incident7 
 
 In March 2015, around the time Applicant and her husband were separating, she 
was arrested for driving while intoxicated (DWI). She went to a dinner party hosted by 
several of her girlfriends. She consumed alcohol and then made the poor decision of 
getting behind the wheel of her car. She hit a mailbox and ended up in a ditch, requiring 
medical attention. When Applicant’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was taken, it 
measured at least three times above the legal limit of .08. She pled guilty and was 
sentenced to 16-weeks of alcohol counseling. She completed all terms of her sentence, 
including the mandated alcohol counseling and alcoholics anonymous (AA) attendance. 
She reported the DWI arrest and subsequent conviction to her security manager.  
 
 Applicant was involved in a previous DWI in the 1990s, when she was a 
teenager. She was going through a tumultuous time, consumed too much alcohol, got 
behind the wheel of a car, and was involved in a car accident.8 The record evidence 
does not reveal any other criminal conduct, arrests, or convictions, alcohol-related or 
otherwise. Present and former co-workers submitted letters providing their favorable 
opinion regarding Applicant’s work ethic, reliability, and overall good character.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 49-53; Exhibits 3 – 4, E – H. 
 
8 This matter was not alleged in the SOR and is only being considered in assessing Applicant’s mitigation 
case, credibility, and whole-person factors. 
 
5 
 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the security concerns at issue, has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
concerns, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, 
an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 
2(b). Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations 
and the paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has 
held that “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 An individual who is granted access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debt raises the 
financial considerations security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an applicant with financial problems might be tempted to compromise classified 
information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent 
 
6 
 
 
to which an applicant’s delinquent debts cast doubt upon their judgment, self-control, 
and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.9  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems raises the financial considerations 
security concern. The record evidence also raises the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” 
 
 Once disqualifying conditions are established, the burden shifts to an applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15). In the present case, Applicant bears a heavy burden in mitigating the 
heightened security concerns raised by her accumulation of delinquent tax debt.10  
 
 The adjudicative guidelines provide for conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns raised by an applicant’s circumstances and conduct. Here, the record 
evidence raised the following mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
10 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues, as follows:  “A security clearance represents an 
obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor 
other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were initially of her own making. She took an early 
withdrawal from her 401(k) retirement account without setting aside a sufficient amount 
to pay the resulting taxes and penalties. However, as evidenced by the IRS 
documentation, Applicant immediately worked out an installment agreement with the 
IRS and started to repay her tax debt in June 2011.  
 
 Applicant’s already strained finances were then negatively impacted by matters 
beyond her control, notably, her husband’s unilateral decision to not pay the mortgage 
and the sharp decrease in their household income after he decided to switch jobs. Her 
financial situation was then further damaged by their recent separation and the resulting 
loss of his income. Applicant again did not sit idly by as her financial situation worsened. 
Instead, after regaining her financial footing, Applicant took positive action to address 
her delinquent accounts. She provided documentary proof showing that she addressed 
and either resolved or is in the process of resolving the mortgage, federal taxes, and 
other marital debts. Although Applicant’s finances are not perfect, she is now living 
within her means and is resolving her debts as her finances allow. The remaining SOR 
debts do not undercut the significant efforts she has made since separating from her 
husband to take control of her finances and satisfy her debts.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
evidence to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, 
to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of 
showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access 
to classified information.11 Applicant met her heavy burden of proof and persuasion in 
mitigating the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Specifically, I find that 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply either in whole or in part and when considered with the 
whole-person factors noted herein mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
 
Security Clearance Application 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her delinquent 
debts on her SCA. This falsification allegation raises the security concern under the 
personal conduct guideline, which is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 14-03112 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) at 4 (“a clearance [decision] . . . is only an attempt to 
predict [an applicant’s] possible future behavior and to assess whether, under the compulsion of 
circumstances or for other reasons, [s/he] might compromise sensitive information.) 
 
8 
 
 
 It is generally well understood that the security clearance process is contingent 
upon the honesty of all applicants. An applicant must disclose relevant matters that are 
responsive to questions on the SCA. However, the omission of material, adverse 
information standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally 
falsified his or her SCA. An omission is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot the 
information requested, inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood the question, or 
sincerely thought the information did not need to be reported. An administrative judge 
must examine the facts and circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an 
applicant’s true intent.12 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately falsify her SCA when she did not list each of her 
debts that were over 120 days delinquent. She voluntarily provided the information 
about her Chapter 13 bankruptcy and genuinely believed that such disclosure was 
responsive to the relevant SCA questions inquiring about her financial record. 
Moreover, she fully discussed her troubled financial situation and past-due debts during 
the security clearance background interviews, which took place shortly after she 
submitted her SCA. She further demonstrated her honesty and trustworthiness when 
she reported the DWI to her security manager, notwithstanding the potential adverse 
impact such disclosure could have on her security clearance eligibility. After considering 
all the evidence and having an opportunity to observe Applicant’s demeanor, I find that 
she did not intend to hide or mislead the Government about her financial situation when 
she submitted her SCA. Accordingly, SOR 2.a is found in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Alcohol-Related Incident 
 
 The SOR further alleges that Applicant’s DWI arrest and conviction raises the 
security concerns under the personal conduct, alcohol consumption, and criminal 
conduct guidelines. The personal conduct concern is noted above, while the security 
concerns related to the two other guidelines are addressed at AG ¶¶ 2113 and 30.14 
 
 Applicant’s DWI raises security concerns under all three alleged security 
guidelines. Although this is the only alcohol-related incident Applicant has been involved 
in about 20 years, the presence of several aggravating factors (i.e., high BAC, car 
accident) raise serious security concerns. The disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 16(c), 
22(a), 31(a), and 31(c) apply. 
 
 Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised 
by her 2015 DWI. At the time, she was going through a significant, life-altering situation, 
(i.e., marital separation). Although this circumstance does not excuse her conduct, it is 
an extenuating and mitigating factor. After the incident, Applicant reported the adverse 
                                                          
12 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
13 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
14 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
9 
 
 
information to her security manager. She successfully completed the terms of her 
sentence, including receiving alcohol counseling and attending AA. Nearly two years 
have passed without any other similar conduct. The only other alcohol-related incident 
was a conviction approximately 20 years ago when she was a teenager. After a review 
of the entire record, I find the 2015 DWI was an aberration that occurred under unique 
circumstances which are unlikely to be repeated. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 23(a), 32(a), and 
32(c) apply in whole or in part and together with the whole-person factors present in this 
case mitigate the security concerns raised by this incident.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
non-exclusive factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems and alcohol-related issue were primarily a 
consequence of the dissolution of an unstable marriage. Even though Applicant 
continues to work on improving her financial situation and the alcohol-related incident 
was relatively recent, the evidence reflects favorable and permanent behavioral 
changes. Of note, is the responsible manner in which Applicant addressed her federal 
tax debt, delinquent mortgage, and a significant portion of her consumer-related debt, 
including taking a second job to pay the debts while still the primary custodial parent of 
three children. Applicant’s track record of responsibly addressing her personal financial 
issues, both self-made and not, raise favorable inferences regarding her current ability 
and willingness to handle her security responsibilities.15 
 
 Additionally, Applicant self-reported the DWI despite the potential negative 
ramifications to her continued employment status as a federal contractor, which is 
dependent on maintaining a clearance. She has held a clearance without issue for the 
past six years. After considering all the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s circumstances and past conduct no longer 
cause doubts about her present suitability for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Drug Involvement):       FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:         For Applicant 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are not an 
exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that 
person's past conduct and present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529). 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:        For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption):      FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a:          For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):       FOR Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
