 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00535 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 17, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 15, 2016. The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant and he was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He received the FORM on March 21, 
2016. He chose not to submit any evidence or object to the Government’s evidence 
included in the FORM. The Government’s evidence (Items 2-3) is admitted.1 The case 
was assigned to me on December 12, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in his answer to the SOR. Those admissions 
are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He has never been married and has no children. He 
has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since August 2011. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 2002. He has held a security clearance since at least 
February 2005.2  
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR concerning Guideline H includes 
using marijuana, with varying frequency, from March 2009 to June 2011; using cocaine 
once in February 2006; and using marijuana and cocaine while holding a security 
clearance. He admitted using marijuana with his friends who would offer it to him. 
During college, he used marijuana about once a week. From 2002-2007 and 2008 to 
2009, he used marijuana once every week or two. He also used it “a few times” while 
staying with friends. His last admitted use was in June 2011 while attending a wedding. 
Some of these uses occurred while he held a security clearance. He used cocaine one 
time while staying with a friend in 2006.3   
 
 He claimed in his security clearance application that he does not intend to use 
controlled substances in the future. He learned that smoking marijuana caused him 
headaches and impaired his thinking. He now intends to live a healthier lifestyle, which 
includes extensive cycling. Applicant did not provide any information about his work 
performance or other facts that could be used to assess the applicability of whole-
person factors.4 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
1 Item 1 includes the SOR and Answer and are considered pleadings, not requiring admission. 
 
2 Items 2-3. 
 
3 Items 2-3. 
 
4 Items 2-3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana on numerous occasions and cocaine once, 
while possessing a security clearance. I find that the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
 Applicant admitted extensive marijuana use. His last use was in June 2011. He 
also admitted a onetime use of cocaine in 2006. Many of the uses occurred while he 
held a security clearance. Although these uses occurred a number of years ago, there is 
insufficient evidence in the record to determine whether he will change his drug use 
behavior. His extensive drug use at his age, education level, and security background is 
 
5 
 
 
troubling and a cause for concern. I do not find persuasive his claim of future intention 
not to use based upon his experiencing headaches. These circumstances lead me to 
conclude that his actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant did not provide a signed statement of intent not to use illegal controlled 
substances which included an understanding of automatic clearance revocation for any 
violation. He also did not provide sufficient evidence of a demonstrated intent not to use 
drugs in the future other than his bare assertion that he would not so use. AG ¶ 26(b) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant engaged in extensive drug 
use that, given his age, education level, and security clearance status, calls into 
question his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs   1.a – 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
