 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-06129 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference trustworthiness concerns, but not the 
foreign influence trustworthiness concerns, raised as a result of his connections to 
Pakistan. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 13, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on September 8, 2016, and issued a 
Notice of Hearing on September 29, 2016, scheduling the hearing for October 18, 2016. 
The hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through E into evidence, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 2, 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
2016. The record remained open until November 19, 2016, to give Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted an additional document 
(with 18 pages) that I marked as AE F and admitted without objection. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Pakistan. She provided five supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts (HE 1.) Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and Department 
Counsel’s request was granted. (Tr. 13.) The facts administratively noticed are limited to 
matters of general knowledge and pertinent to Pakistan, and not subject to reasonable 
dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations contained in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Answer.)  
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan. He is 41 years old and unmarried. He has no 
children. He attended high school there. He came to the United States in 1992 on a 
student visa. He received a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university in 1997. (Tr. 15-
17.) After graduating, he worked at a financial institution for nine years. He 
subsequently worked for other private companies until he started his current position 
with a health care company in 2010. (Tr. 18-20.) He became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 2012. (Tr. 37.) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Pakistan. His father is deceased. His mother, 
age 80, is a citizen resident of Pakistan. (Tr. 21) He does not send her any money. (Tr. 
23.) His mother was visiting at the time of this hearing. She had been in the United 
States for about four months. She also visited him in 2015. She visited two other times. 
Applicant is attempting to obtain permanent residency in the United States for his 
mother. (Tr. 24-26, 29.) He speaks to her once every week or two. (Tr. 29-30.) When 
she visits him, Applicant pays for her living expenses; she uses her money for shopping. 
(Tr. 35.) 
 
 Applicant has one brother and three sisters, all of whom are citizens and 
residents in Pakistan. None of them work for the Pakistani government. He has not 
spoken to or seen his sisters for three or four years. He speaks to his brother, an 
accountant, once a year, and saw him three or four years ago when Applicant visited his 
mother. His brother lives about 900 miles from Applicant’s mother. (Tr. 22, 30, 32-33, 
42.) One of Applicant’s sisters is a physician; another is a teacher; and the other sister 
is an accountant. None of his siblings have visited him in the United States. (Tr. 26.) He 
does not have a good relationship with his siblings. His occasional conversation with 
them pertains to his mother. (Answer.) 
 
After leaving Pakistan in 1992, Applicant returned to Pakistan in 1998 for his 
father’s funeral. He next returned in 2004 or 2005. (Tr. 28.) He also visited in 2006, 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
2007, 2010, 2012, and 2013. He has not returned since 2013. He stated that the only 
reason he has returned to Pakistan is to see his elderly mother. (Tr. 26-27; Answer; AE 
F.) His mother has limited contact with his siblings. (Tr. 41.) 
 
Applicant has a Pakistani passport that was issued in 2012 and expired in 2015. 
He has no intention of renewing it. (Tr. 36; Answer.) After becoming a U.S. citizen, he 
used it twice to travel to Pakistan in 2012 and 2013. (Tr. 38.) He stated he used the 
Pakistani passport so he could keep a “low profile while traveling there,” and not give 
the impression that he is a rich person coming into the country, which could lead to him 
being kidnapped. The passport made it easier for him to go through customs. (Tr. 39; 
GE 2.) He did not know that using the passport could create a trustworthiness concern. 
He does not have any plans to return to Pakistan. (Tr. 38-39; GE 2.) He is willing to 
“swear that I have renounced Pakistan citizenship, in addition to giving the passport or 
tearing it apart . . . . I have no ties to Pakistan except travel and I can travel on my US 
passport.” (Tr. 37.) 
 
Applicant owns his residence in the United States, which he purchased in 2013 
for about $575,000. The mortgage balance is about $375,000. He has about $400,000 
in retirement accounts in the United States. (Tr. 23-24.) He also owns two other houses; 
one has a mortgage and the other one is paid. (Tr. 34.) He estimates his U.S. assets 
total about $700,000. He does not have any assets in Pakistan. (Tr. 40.)  
 
Applicant submitted a Certificate of Appreciation he received from his employer. 
(AE A.) His performance evaluations for 2013, 2014, and 2015 document successful 
work and participation in achieving his employer’s expectations. (AE C, D, E.)  
  
Pakistan 
 
 Pakistan is an ally of the United States and it has a history of political unrest, 
intolerance, human trafficking, and the presence of the Taliban and al-Qaeda, terrorist 
organizations, which continue to assert power and intimidation within the country and 
the bordering country of Afghanistan. Safety and security are key issues because these 
terrorist organizations target United States interests in Pakistan and in Afghanistan by 
suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage taking. 
At this time, the risk of terrorist activities remains high and the country’s human rights 
record remains poor. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, 
insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western 
nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for foreign preference is set 
out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline sets out a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern 
under AG ¶ 10 and be disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
  Applicant has a Pakistani passport, which was issued in 2012 and expired in 
2015. He became a U.S. citizen in early 2012, and used that passport later in 2012 and 
2013:  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are 
described under AG ¶ 11. One is applicable: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant stated that the passport expired in 2015. He said he did not know that 
using it could create a trustworthiness concern. He does not intend to travel to Pakistan 
in the future. He has a U.S. passport. AG ¶ 11(e) provides mitigation. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to foreign influence as 
follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a [trustworthiness] concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Applicant’s mother and four siblings are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Pakistan 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of sensitive information. (See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001)).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the foreign 
country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, 
or is a known terrorist haven. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places 
a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with family members living in Pakistan do not pose a risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist family members with ties to Pakistan. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding [sensitive] information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interest inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 01-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar 29, 2002.) 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified, sensitive, or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Pakistan has a significant problem 
with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with his mother, brother, and three sisters, living 
in Pakistan, creates a potential conflict of interest because these relationships could 
raise a trustworthiness concern about his desire to assist or protect those family 
members by providing sensitive information. Accordingly, Applicant’s family connections 
have a potential to generate a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about the potential application of any mitigating conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns. Those with potential application in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Since leaving Pakistan Applicant 
has maintained close contact with his mother, occasional contact with his brother living 
in Pakistan, and sporadic contact with his sisters. His loyalty and connections to his 
family, in particular to his mother, are positive character traits. However, for 
trustworthiness purposes, those same connections negate the possibility of mitigation 
under AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to fully meet his burden 
of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives who are 
[Pakistan] residents and citizens could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
Applicant has an ongoing and close relationship with his mother, and an interest 
in protecting her. His communications with her are frequent and not casual. He visited 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
her in Pakistan at least seven times since arriving in the United States in 1992. In fact, 
he stated that the primary reason he returns to Pakistan is to see her. She has visited 
him in the United States at least three times, and stayed for several weeks. He has 
annual contact with his brother. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish the mitigating 
conditions set forth in AG ¶ 8(c) as to his mother or brother. He has contact with his 
three sisters every couple years. His relationship with all siblings is strained; however, 
based on the infrequent contacts and nature of his relationship with his sisters, the 
evidence established some mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c) as to them. 
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he “can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant has lived in the United States 
since 1992, about 24 years. He became a citizen in 2012. He attended a U.S. university 
where he completed a degree, and subsequently began working for U.S. companies. 
He has been successfully employed with his current employer since 2010. He owns 
three houses in the United States. His real property and financial assets have an 
estimated value of about $700,000. He does not own any assets in Pakistan. These are 
facts that indicate Applicant can be expected to resolve a conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) provides some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a position of trust must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence 
weighs in favor of granting Applicant a position of trust. He is an intelligent, articulate, 
and educated person, who has lived in the United States for 24 years. He attended a 
U.S. university. He owns three houses in the United States and has significant assets 
here. He has successfully worked for his current employer for six years. 
 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more 
persuasive than the facts weighing in favor of approval of his request for a position of 
trust. Applicant’s mother and four siblings are citizens and residents of Pakistan. He 
does not have family members in the United States. His frequent contact with his 
mother and assistance in her pursuit of immigration to the United States indicate his 
strong commitment to her safety and welfare. He has annual contact with his brother, 
and some, albeit infrequent, communication with his three sisters. More importantly for 
trustworthiness purposes, there is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights 
abuses in Pakistan. Applicant admitted there is a threat of being kidnapped if he used a 
passport from a country other than Pakistan. Terrorists or the Pakistani government 
could attempt to use Applicant’s family members to obtain protected information and 
compromise Applicant’s responsibilities to the United States.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns arising under the foreign preference guideline, but he has not 
fully mitigated the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of 
trust.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:                 For Applicant 
    
                  Paragraph 2, Guideline B   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:        Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:                  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:                  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a position of 
trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
