 
  1
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
        [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01818 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Despite several events and circumstances largely beyond her control that 
contributed to her financial issues, Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on July 23, 2014. 
On October 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 9, 2015, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
 
  2
case on February 9, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, was sent to Applicant on 
February 10, 2016. She was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on 
February 19, 2016, and did not respond.1 The case was assigned to me on September 
13, 2016.  
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately $68,498. In her 
Answer, Applicant admitted each of the debts, but provided proof of payment of SOR ¶ 
1.n and stated she was in repayment of SOR ¶ 1.o. Applicant’s admissions in her 
Answer are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old training developer employed by a defense contractor 
since June 2014. She was employed by a federal contractor from May 2012 until May 
2014, when the contract she worked on expired. This is her first application for a 
security clearance. She received a bachelor’s degree in May 1989. She and her 
husband married in 1991 and have two children ages 21 and 17. (GX 3.)   
  
The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) 
from September 2015 and August 2014. (GX 4; GX 5.) She listed several of her 
delinquent accounts on her e-QIP, and discussed many of the accounts during her 
personal subject interview (PSI) on September 10, 2014. (GX 3; GX 6.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for a judgment entered against Applicant in 
2012, and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are for judgments entered in 2013. 
The judgments are for delinquent credit-card accounts totaling $19,596. The debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.h, totaling $40,010 are consumer-loan and credit-card 
debts that have been placed for collection. SOR debts 1.d through 1.g became 
delinquent in 2010 and SOR 1.h became delinquent in 2012. The debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.i and 1.j, totaling $2,869, are credit-card debts that went delinquent in 2010 and 
have been charged off. The medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m total 
$736 and were incurred between 2013 and 2014. (GX 3; GX 4; GX 5; GX 6.) These 
debts are unresolved.   
 
With her Answer, Applicant provided a receipt for payment and release of the 
$1,040 tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. This debt is resolved. She also stated in her 
Answer that she is currently paying a past-due mortgage loan. However, she did not 
provide any supporting documentation.  
 
                                                            
1  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated April 8, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated February 19, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after receiving it to submit information. The DOHA transmittal letter and receipt are 
appended to the record as Administrative Exhibit 1. 
 
 
  3
In her Answer, e-QIP, and PSI, Applicant explains that in 2008, her husband’s 
commission-based income began to decline, which resulted in their stopping payments 
on revolving debt in order to pay household necessities. Her husband was unemployed 
from May 2013 to December 2013, when he accepted a lower-paying job. He was again 
unemployed from May 2014 until July 2014, and his current position does not pay as 
well as his pre-2008 job. At some point in 2013, Applicant and her husband withdrew a 
large portion of her husband’s retirement to help with living expenses. However, this 
withdrawal resulted in significant tax liability in 2013. Applicant was unemployed for 
about three weeks in June 2014, and received unemployment compensation.   
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
  4
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
  5
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Some of Applicant’s financial difficulties may have been the result of 
circumstances largely beyond her control, such as her husband’s periods of 
unemployment and underemployment and her period of unemployment. However, there 
is no indication that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s 
financial difficulties arose in 2008 when her husband’s income began to decline and are 
ongoing. Applicant stated that she and her husband stopped paying their revolving debt 
in order to pay their necessary living expenses. However, this explanation does not 
support a finding that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is no 
evidence that she changed her spending behavior, received financial counseling, or 
took any steps to take control of her financial circumstances and prevent further 
delinquencies. While three of the delinquent debts totaling $736 are for unpaid medical 
bills, there is no evidence that they originated from a medical emergency. Of the over 
$68,000 in delinquent debt, of which over $42,000 is consumer debt, Applicant has only 
paid the $1,040 tax lien, which she paid in 2014. While she claims to be paying on her 
past-due mortgage debt of $4,247, she did not provide any supporting evidence. 
However, even if she is paying this debt, she has not established a sufficient track 
record of debt resolution to constitute a good-faith effort to repay her creditors. None of 
the mitigating conditions apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
  6
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried 
her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.o:     Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
