 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08705 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 24, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns related to foreign preference raised by his 
previous possession of a Columbian passport. He has formally renounced his 
Columbian citizenship and his Columbian passport has been invalidated. Further, he 
mitigated the foreign influence concerns raised by his wife’s family and property in 
Columbia. He can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the United States. His 
request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 31, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 17, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on August 17, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 24, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 21, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant presented one 
exhibit, marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection, and 
testified on his own behalf. The record was left open for receipt of additional 
documentation until close of business January 16, 2017. Applicant presented two post-
hearing exhibits, marked AE B and AE C1, and they were admitted. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2016. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Colombia. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the 
facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to Colombia, identified as HE 
I. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters 
of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, 2.d, 2.e, and 2.f. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since 2010. His work aids the U.S. fighting narco-
terrorism abroad. He served on active duty with the Army from 1984 to 1991 and held a 
top secret security clearance during that time. He served on active reserve status with 
the Army from 1991 to 1995. He achieved the rank of captain. He received an 
honorable discharge. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 58.)  
 
 Applicant was born in Colombia. He lived in Colombia until he was five years old. 
He immigrated to the United States in 1966 with his parents and siblings. His entire 
immediate family became U.S. citizens together in 1980. He earned a bachelor’s degree 
from a U.S. university in 1983. He has two children, ages 18 and 14. They are solely 
U.S. residents and citizens, although they were born in Mexico. He owns a home in the 
United States, which he purchased in 2012. He also has a 401(k) investment plan. He 
estimated his assets in the United States to total “a half million dollars.” (GE 1; Tr. 32, 
58.) 
                                                          
1 AE C is a certified English translation of AE B. Department Counsel originally objected to the 
consideration of AE B, before a certified translation was provided. Department Counsel had no objection 
to AE C. Both were admitted under the doctrine of completeness, after the translation was entered into 
evidence. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s job with a defense contractor requires extensive travel in Latin and 
South America. He frequently travels to Colombia. In June 2012, Applicant acquired a 
Colombian passport because it became an immigration requirement of the Columbian 
authorities for Columbian-born individuals to enter and exit Colombia using Columbian 
passports. Prior to 2012, Applicant traveled to Colombia using his U.S. passport only. 
However, the Colombia immigration authorities became stringent with the regulations 
and would not permit him to leave Columbia without obtaining a Colombian passport. 
He did so, and has been using his Colombian passport since that time on his monthly 
business trips to Colombia. (Tr. 48-54, 59-61.) 
 
 Applicant petitioned the Colombian government to renounce his dual Colombian 
citizenship. On December 15, 2016, his petition was granted, and his Colombian 
citizenship was formally renounced. His Colombian passport was surrendered to the 
Colombian government, with his application to renounce his Colombian citizenship. (AE 
B; AE C.) 
 
 Applicant married his wife in August 2011. They met in 2008. She is 49 years old. 
Applicant resides in the United States with his wife and 18-year-old stepson. His wife 
and stepson are legal permanent residents in the United States and possess Colombian 
citizenship. They have both resided in the United States with Applicant for the past four 
years. His stepdaughter is a citizen and resident of Colombia. She is entirely supported 
by her father. Applicant does “not consider her a stepdaughter because I don’t give her 
any support whatsoever, nor do I report her on my taxes.” She is approximately 24 
years old and attends graduate school. Applicant has infrequent contact with her. (AE A; 
Tr. 28, 35-37, 58.)  
 
 Applicant also has an uncle that is a citizen and resident of Colombia. He is a 
retired senior citizen in his early 70’s. He worked as a “bank official at the National Bank 
of Colombia,” which is state run. He is supported by a pension from the Colombian 
government. (Tr. 28, 38-39, 58.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is in her 70’s and has always been a homemaker. She 
is supported by Applicant’s wife and possibly by a government pension. When Applicant 
met his wife, she owned a taxi business valued at $25,000 and a condominium in 
Colombia valued at $90,000. The taxi business consists of one vehicle and one 
employee, a driver. It is used to supplement the income of Applicant’s mother-in-law. 
His mother-in-law resides in the condominium. The condominium is paid in full and 
generates no rental income. His wife pays property taxes on the condominium to the 
Colombian government each year. Applicant’s wife also sends money to her mother on 
occasion. Applicant was unsure of the frequency or amounts. Applicant is not sure if his 
wife has any bank accounts in Colombia. Applicant testified he gets “no monetary 
compensation from either asset.” He has no property interest in either asset, as they 
belong solely to his wife. He does not stay at the condominium when he travels to 
Colombia. (AE A; Tr. 27-28, 38-44, 63-66.)  
 
 
4 
 
Applicant testified his monthly travel to Columbia is for work purposes. He 
explained: 
 
I work very closely with the U.S. Government and what we're doing in 
Colombia and I'm also very sensitive to the presence of the elements that 
are -- have interest against the United States like the FARC, the ELN or 
any other criminal bands there. Usually when I go somewhere, I have to 
make sure that I have plenty of security. On occasion I've even been 
assigned up to 25 police bodyguard detail. If I go to certain parts of the 
country like the jungle, certain parts of the jungle, obviously there's no 
command and control there. So I'm provided enough security. The U.S. 
Embassy will usually on occasion send their own aircraft to take me to 
certain locations, and I'm always usually in the company of either 
Colombian Army or Colombian police or some security detail that's 
managed by, if not the Colombians, by the U.S. government. (Tr. 55.) 
 
When asked what he would do if he, his wife’s family, or his wife’s property would 
be threatened, he replied: 
 
Well, I've made it very clear I think to my wife or to my family -- my family 
certainly knows my service to my country and my patriotism. 
Unfortunately, I would have to let the legal authorities in Colombia manage 
that type of activity. I would not get involved whatsoever.  . . . But so I'm 
very sensitive to the political situation and what's happening in Colombia. 
I'm obviously very sensitive to putting my person or people close to me in 
jeopardy. I have, for example, have told my children -- my children were 
born in Mexico, and I told them they cannot travel to certain parts of 
Mexico because of my position with the [name omitted] Corporation. And 
the same for Colombia, you know, they cannot travel to the rural areas or 
parts of the country. I wouldn't allow them to, unless, you know, they were 
provided the same security precautions that I take, and they obviously will 
not be provided the security precautions. (Tr. 56-57.) 
 
The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to 
Colombia. Dangers in Columbia include: potential for narco-terrorist violence in some 
rural areas and cities; the potential for violence by terrorists and other criminal elements 
in all parts of the country; terrorists and criminal organizations kidnap and hold persons 
of all nationalities; and human rights violations. Two Columbian organizations have 
been placed on the Foreign Terrorist Organizations list maintained by the Secretary of 
State. (HE I.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
5 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
  Applicant was a dual citizen of the United States and Columbia. He exercised his 
Columbian citizenship when he acquired the Columbian passport, despite that fact that 
he was a United States citizen at that time and had a U.S. passport. He used that 
passport to travel to Columbia on numerous occasions. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. Two are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant surrendered his Columbian passport when he submitted his request to 
renounce his Columbian citizenship. The request has been approved and his is now 
solely a U.S. citizen. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) provide mitigation with respect to this 
guideline. 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant’s stepdaughter, mother-in-law, and uncle are citizens and residents of 
Colombia. His wife and stepson are citizens of Colombia and reside with Applicant in 
the United States. His wife owns a condominium and taxi business in Colombia. To be 
fully applicable, AG ¶¶ 7(a), (d), and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a heightened 
risk. The heightened risk required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a 
relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government or substantial 
assets in a foreign nation. In this instance, a heightened risk is present because of the 
terrorists and criminal organizations at work in Columbia. The evidence is sufficient to 
 
8 
 
raise these disqualifying conditions. AG ¶¶ 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) also apply due to 
Applicant’s close connections to his wife and her property and connections to her family 
in Colombia. There is no evidence that Applicant has any financial or property interests 
in Columbia independent of those owned by his wife and discussed above. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
 Applicant’s ties to his mother-in-law, stepdaughter, and uncle are not close. 
However, his wife clearly has close ties of affection to both her mother and daughter. 
She supports her mother through the taxi business and provides her a condominium in 
Colombia. The value of his wife’s assets in Colombia is significant, even in light of his 
net worth of half of a million dollars in the United States. However, Applicant’s strong 
sense of loyalty to the United States indicates he would resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. He has been in the United States since the age of five. He 
served in the U.S. Army from 1984 to 1995 and achieved the rank of captain. He has 
built a life in the U.S. His children are citizens and residents of the United States. He 
has formally renounced his dual citizenship with Colombia. He owns his home in the 
U.S., and all of his personal net wealth is invested here. He testified he has no interest 
in his wife’s properties. He intimately understands the risks involved in criminal factions 
active within Colombia, and always travels with U.S. security forces when traveling in 
there. He indicated that he would respond to any threats or coercion by notifying the 
proper authorities. Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in favor 
of the U.S. interests. As a result, the above mitigating condition was persuasively 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
While Applicant was born Columbia, he is an American by choice. He has been 
residing in the United States since 1966. His parents, siblings, and children are all U.S. 
citizens and residents. He is not close to any of his relatives in Columbia and he has no 
personal property interest in his wife’s investments there. He no longer has a Columbian 
passport and he has formally renounced his Colombian citizenship. He served 
honorably in the U.S. Army. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States due to his longstanding ties and dedicated service here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
