 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07508 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Matthew J. Reilly, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 4, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 4, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 7, 2016. He answered the 
SOR in writing on April 21, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 1, 2016, and I received 
the case assignment on June 13, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 4, 
2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 23, 2016. The Government 
offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified 
 
2 
 
 
and submitted Exhibits A through H, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on August 31, 2016. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record 
open until September 6, 2016, to submit additional matters. On September 6, 2016, he 
submitted Exhibits I to N, without objection. The record closed on September 6, 2016. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant denied all the allegations concerning his 
unpaid Federal and state income taxes of several types. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and married. He had two children, one of which is 
deceased, and one stepchild. He worked for a state government (State M) from 1998 to 
2001. He lived in state M until 2004 when he moved to State A. He was a contractual 
employee for a private corporation from August 2001 to December 2014. Now he works 
as a full-time employee for a defense contractor and has since June 1, 2015. He lives 
now in another state (State I). His wife operated a private business from 2005 to 2009 in 
State A. Applicant inherited money and he used large sums of it to purchase a coffee 
franchise for his wife while he worked in the corporate contractual position. He helped 
her in their business on weekends.  (Tr. 27, 56, 63, 75-77; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant is alleged not to have filed income tax returns for States A and M from 
2009 to 2013. He is also alleged to not have filed his Federal corporate and personal 
income tax returns for the same years. He owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and 
the same two states self-employment taxes for 2009 and 2010. He owes his State M 
$902.00 on a tax lien from 2002 personal income taxes. The lien was filed in 2011. The 
state tax authority claims Applicant underreported his contractual income for that year.  
Applicant has not paid that debt because he wants the basis for it explained to him and 
verified that he owes it. He contacted by telephone the state tax authority in the summer 
months of 2015, but does not remember exactly when he made that contact. He claims 
the state tax authority will not give him any information, so he refuses to pay it. (Tr. 21-
73; Exhibits 2-4; SOR) 
 
 Applicant admits he did not file his Federal and state income taxes on time after 
he closed the coffee shop business in State A in June 2009 because it was losing too 
much money. The franchisor of the business then withdrew Applicant’s access to the 
company computer system so Applicant could not access financial records with which to 
prepare and file the various returns. He stated he needed and IRS Form K-1 for the 
business income tax form and then used that form to file his personal income taxes 
because the corporate structure of the coffee shop was a Subchapter S corporation 
under the IRS Code. This business structure involved corporate income passing 
through to him and his wife to be included on his personal income tax form. Without the 
business tax return being completed, he contended he could not file his personal tax 
forms for each year at issue. To resolve his tax problems, Applicant used the certified 
 
3 
 
 
public accountant (CPA) he used since 2005 and who dealt with the franchisor on a 
regular basis so he was familiar with that business to prepare his 2009 to 2013 tax 
returns. (Tr. 28, 31, 37, 46-60; Exhibits 2-4, A-N) 
 
 Applicant submitted unsigned copies of the 2009 to 2013 Federal and State A 
income tax returns. He submitted an email marked as Exhibit J from State A showing all 
tax returns from 2009 to 2014 were filed before August 29, 2016 and current. Applicant 
submitted IRS tax transcripts showing the 2009 tax forms were filed and paid on 
February 7, 2012 (Exhibits B and M), the 2010 tax forms were filed on January 11, 
2016, and paid (Exhibits C and K), the 2011 tax forms were filed and paid on April 21, 
2016, (Exhibits D and N), and the 2012 taxes were filed and paid on May 2, 2016 
(Exhibits E and I). Applicant submitted a copy of his unsigned 2013 Federal and State A 
personal and corporate income forms. He did not submit an IRS tax transcript showing 
the 2013 Federal tax forms were filed and paid. (Tr. 21-73; Exhibits 2-4, A-N) 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from his CPA dated June 30, 2016, stating the 
history of his tax problems and the efforts the CPA firm made to resolve them. Applicant 
also testified his heart attack in 2013 delayed the transmittal of information to the CPA 
and receipt by him of information, further delaying the final preparation of the income tax 
forms. The CPA firm also submitted two documents showing the Federal tax penalty for 
2010 imposed for failure to timely file the corporate tax return was removed by the IRS. 
The June 2016 CPA letter states that based on their work and discussions with 
Applicant that all tax returns have been filed, taxes paid, and Applicant is owed several 
refunds from the IRS for certain tax years. The CPA also stated that extension requests 
were filed by it for Applicant on each tax year’s obligations. (Tr. 21-73; Exhibits A, G, H)  
 
 The SOR in Subparagraph 1.a alleges Applicant did not file personal income tax 
forms for State M for 2009 to 2013. Subparagraph 1.d alleges he did not file and pay 
State M self-employment taxes for 2009 and 2010. Applicant testified he has not lived in 
State M since 2004 and does not owe that state any tax money. Applicant submitted a 
mailing form showing he mailed some document to State M on August 25, 2016, but did 
not submit any explanation on the exhibit as to what it was or its purpose. Applicant has 
not filed a written objection or protest with that state about this tax lien. (Tr. 27; Exhibits 
2-4, L) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
 
4 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not pay his Federal and state income taxes, both his personal 
taxes, self-employment, and corporate taxes, from 2009 to 2013, as he is required to do 
so. Applicant worked as a contract employee for a private corporation from 2002 to 
2015 while his wife and he owned and operated a coffee house restaurant in their town 
of residence in State A. Applicant has not paid a $902 tax lien for underreported self -
employment income to his original state of residence, State M. He has not submitted 
any evidence of a written document to show he objected to the tax lien on a legitimate 
basis that he is not required to pay it. The evidence raises all of the three security 
concerns stated, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate 
those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Five conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted  responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant has not lived in State M since 2004. Therefore, he is not legally 
obligated to pay income taxes to that state in 2009 to 2013. SOR Subparagraph 1.a is 
not substantiated as a legitimate tax obligation of his to pay. Subparagraph 1.e. alleges, 
and the credit reports submitted show, that he has a $902 personal income tax lien 
owed to State M from 2002 when it is asserted by that state that Applicant understated 
his self-employment income, resulting in a lower tax obligation than legally owed. 
Applicant has not submitted any documents to show he objected in writing to the lien. 
However, he claims credibly that he has a legitimate basis to object to the lien. His e-
QIP shows he worked out of that state after 2001 while maintaining a residence until 
2004. He submitted an exhibit showing he mailed in August 2016 a document to State 
M about the tax situation, but not a copy of the document itself. Therefore, regarding all 
taxes claimed by State M to be owed to it by Applicant AG ¶ 20 (e) is established.  
 
Applicant’s State A and Federal tax obligations started in 2009 when he shut the 
coffee house business and was locked out of a computer system he contends contained 
tax documents he needed to calculate his obligations. That assertion is supported by 
the letters submitted by his CPA. No longer operating such a business means its 
circumstances were unusual and are not likely to recur. His actions to engage a CPA 
firm to prepare the tax forms and calculate his tax obligations show that he has good 
judgment, is trustworthy, and is currently reliable. He did not ignore the duty to file but 
actively engaged a professional to resolve his tax obligations. AG ¶ 20 (a) is 
established.  
 
The conditions that resulted in Applicant having unpaid tax obligations were 
beyond his control as shown by the tax documents he submitted as exhibits. They show 
substantial losses from the business that could no longer be sustained. Applicant acted 
responsibly under these circumstances by closing the business, obtaining better 
employment for himself, and engaging a CPA to gather data upon which to correctly 
calculate his tax obligations to the Federal government and State A. Those tax forms 
have now been filed and the money paid as required. Because of the business losses 
under the Subchapter S corporate structure Applicant is now due refunds on his income 
taxes for certain years. AG ¶ 20 (b) is established.   
  
Applicant filed and paid the taxes he owed on his personal income and his coffee 
house business. These tax obligations are resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) is established.  
 
Applicant paid his tax obligations. His tax forms for the Federal and State A 
government are paid. His only income now is from his current job. All the issues 
 
7 
 
 
presented in the SOR are resolved. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-
faith efforts to repay his delinquent tax debts after filing the required tax forms. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (f) is not established because there is no showing of affluence that has 
raised any issue. It is not relevant in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant started and then closed a 
business. The coffee house business collapsed because it was not making a profit 
sufficient to sustain itself. Applicant acted responsibly in taking that action. But by doing 
so he incurred another problem, accessing the necessary financial information he 
alleged was on the business franchisor’s computer system so that he could prepare his 
tax returns for the Federal and State A governments. The business was located in State 
A. These events were unique and are now in the past, not to be repeated. It can be said 
his participation in the entire series of events was voluntary. But his behavior has 
changed permanently. There is no likelihood of continuance or recurrence, nor a 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress because all tax matters have 
been resolved. The entire issue is closed.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
