 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03798 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 3, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
17, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 6, 2016. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant objected to GE 2, and it was not admitted 
into evidence. The remaining exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 14, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. She denied 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She attended college from 1990 to 1993, as a full-time 
student, but did not earn a degree. She was married from 1996 to 2006. She testified 
that she did not work for three to four years after she married. She has no children. She 
does not provide financial support for anyone. She has been employed by a federal 
contractor since 2003.1 
 
 Applicant testified that in 1990 she obtained student loans to attend college. She 
obtained both federal and private student loans. She attended college until she could no 
longer obtain loans to continue her education. She believed the college received money 
from one of the loans for a semester she did not attend. She believed someone 
fraudulently cashed the loan check. It is unclear if that loan is included with her other 
student loans. She stated that she believed she borrowed about $10,000 and the 
balance owed was about $12,000. The loans were deferred for an unknown period. She 
testified she did not make any payments on the loans from 1994 to 1996. The loans 
were sold to other lenders. She testified that she made inconsistent payments on the 
loans until about 2008 and then stopped paying them. She estimated that she paid 
about $2,000 during this period. It is unknown when or if she restarted the payments. In 
her security clearance application (SCA), she indicated she had two delinquent student 
loans in the amount of $17,000 each. No documents were provided to verify the periods 
of deferment or payments made during these periods.2 
 
Applicant testified that at some point her wages were garnished $400 a month to 
pay her student loans, and she believed it occurred over a four to five-year period. She 
testified that the garnishment payments stopped and resumed when the loans were sold 
to different creditors. In addition, her federal income tax refunds were involuntarily 
withheld. She believed about $14,000 was withheld over the years. Applicant testified 
that she told the government investigator, who conducted her background interview in 
2013, that she had the ability to pay her loans and would follow up to do so. She 
subsequently had difficulties finding the current creditors because the loans were sold. 
She testified that at the time she could not afford to make the loan payments. The total 
                                                          
1 Tr. 20-23, 47, 50; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 23-27, 44-51; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
amount that was garnished over the years is unknown. The student loan that was paid 
for a period through garnishment is unknown.3  
 
Sometime in 2016, Applicant was contacted by one of the student loan creditors 
and was advised to participate in an automatic repayment rehabilitation program. She 
testified that she thought her loans were being paid through garnishment. She stated 
she was told she owed a balance of $22,000. She did not provide documentation to 
verify her current balance. She entered the rehabilitation program and pays $5 a month. 
After she completes nine consecutive monthly payments, her loans will come out of 
default status and a monthly payment arrangement will be made. She anticipated this 
would occur in December 2016, and the payment amount would be approximately $200 
to $300.4 Applicant requested the student loan creditor cease her garnishment 
payments. She provided a letter from July 2016 from the creditor advising her that her 
request was being processed. She testified that at the time of the hearing, her wages 
were not being garnished. No additional information was provided. She testified that the 
student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($18,009) and 1.f ($11,045) are still delinquent, but are 
being rehabilitated. She intends to pay them, but was confused as to the identity of the 
creditors and believed the garnishment payments were satisfying her student loan 
debts.5  
 
 Applicant admitted the delinquent medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($172) and 1.c 
($156) in her answer to the SOR, stating she thought they were paid, and if they still 
needed to be paid she would do so. According to her credit report, it appears SOR ¶ 1.b 
was settled for less than the full amount in 2015. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c remains 
unresolved. Applicant testified that she checked with her medical providers and does 
not know what this debt was for. No other action was taken to dispute or resolve this 
debt. She indicated that she could not determine the specific creditor.6  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d ($715) alleged a judgment. Credit reports from August 2013, April 
2015, and July 2016 report the judgment. The July 2016 credit report shows a different 
first name, but lists Applicant’s maiden name and her correct Social Security number. In 
addition, the creditor is the same apartment complex where she lives. Applicant denied 
the judgment belongs to her. Department Counsel provided the court abstract of the 
judgment that has a similar name as Applicant’s but a different Social Security number. 
This allegation is concluded for Applicant.7  
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 27-46, 51-55, 59-60; GE 3, AE B. Applicant testified the garnishment began in approximately 2012 or 
2013, but she also indicated on her security clearance application that it began in 2006. No documentary 
evidence was provided to clarify the discrepancy. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 30-46, 60-61; AE B, C.  
 
6 Tr. 62-65; GE 4, 5. 
 
7 Tr. 65-69; GE 1, 3, 4, 5; AE D  
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant denied she owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($182) for a check returned for 
nonsufficient funds. During her hearing, she acknowledged that she told the investigator 
in 2013 that she would research the debt, and she had the ability to pay it if it belonged 
to her. She testified that she did not obtain a copy of her credit report until it was mailed 
to her as part of these proceedings. She did not provide information of her actions to 
dispute the check.8 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to underemployment. After she 
divorced in 2006, she received $16,000 from her husband’s pension account. It was 
transferred to her pension plan, and she withdrew $4,000 and used that money to pay 
her credit cards. In 2010, she purchased a new vehicle. She stated she has one more 
payment and the loan will be satisfied. She has nine open credit cards with an 
approximate cumulative balance of more than $9,000. She estimated she has about 
$100 remaining at the end of the month after she pays bills. She intends to use her 
2016 income tax refund to pay her credit cards, and will have money to pay her student 
loans. She anticipated her income tax refund would be approximately $2,000. She has 
$300 in a savings account and $100 in a checking account. She does not have a budget 
and has not received financial counseling.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 69-75. 
 
9 Tr. 76-89. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved financial delinquencies. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s student loans were deferred for an unknown period and were 
delinquent. Her wages were garnished for a period to pay them. Subsequent to 
receiving the SOR, she began a loan rehabilitation program. After completion of the 
program a new monthly payment will be determined. Applicant’s delinquent loans are 
not resolved. Her actions to resolve them were not timely. Her failure to actively address 
her delinquent student loans casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to being underemployed and not 
having sufficient money to repay her student loans. This was marginally beyond her 
control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant’s wages were garnished to repay her loans. It is 
apparent she was confused as to which loans were being paid. She began participating 
in a modest rehabilitation program paying $5 a month on her student loans, but did not 
begin until after she was contacted by the creditor. She has been steadily employed 
since 2003. She received $16,000 from her husband after they divorced in 2006. She 
used some of the money to pay credit card debts. She did not provide evidence of 
action she may have taken at this time to make payment arrangement for her student 
loans. Applicant did not act responsibly in addressing her student loans. AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies. 
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial counseling. She does not have a 
budget or a realistic plan for managing her student loan payments once a monthly 
payment plan is implemented. At this juncture, it is too early to conclude that her 
financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. The remaining 
delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c are small, and Applicant attempted to resolve 
the medical debt but was advised she did not have any outstanding bills from her 
provider. The other debt she has consistently disputed. I have given her the benefit of 
the doubt on these debts and find in her favor. Applicant’s garnishment payments and 
recent monthly loan rehabilitation payments do not constitute a good-faith effort to repay 
her creditors. She has had years to address the student loans and continues to be 
confused about their status and balances. There are not clear indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
She provided sufficient evidence to refute the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. AG ¶ 
20(e) applies to this debt. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 47 years old. She has been steadily employed since 2003. She is 
single and does not provide financial support for anyone else. The major financial 
security concern is her delinquent student loans. Applicant does not have a solid 
understanding of the specifics of her student loans. At times they have been paid 
through garnishment, but it is unclear which of the loans the payments were applied to, 
and both remain delinquent. Although she indicated she was unable to pay them in the 
past due to underemployment, she failed to provide a credible record of her efforts to 
voluntarily resolve them through a plan. The loan holder contacted her to arrange a 
modest rehabilitation program. Once she completes it, a monthly payment program will 
begin. Applicant does not have realistic plan or budget for managing these future 
monthly payments. She has nine open credit cards that she is paying, along with her 
other regular monthly expenses. She indicated that she intends to use her income tax 
refund to pay her credit cards, but in the past her tax refunds were involuntarily withheld 
and applied to student loan debt. It is unknown if that will continue. She indicated she 
has $100 remaining at the end of the month, and her car note is almost paid, so she will 
have additional expendable income. Applicant does not have a reliable track record of 
acting responsibly toward resolving her student loans. Until she consistently makes the 
new monthly payments on her student loans after a plan is implemented, it is too early 
to conclude that her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness are not a security concern. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations guideline security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
