 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-04924 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s criminal problems began in 2006 and continued into 2014. Some of 
his offenses involved the abuse of alcohol and marijuana. He failed to present sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the personal and criminal conduct trustworthiness concerns. Based 
upon a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 15, 2015, Applicant submitted a public trust position application (SF 
85P). On January 31, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline E, 
(Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 1, 2016 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Department of Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on September 8, 2016. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on September 29, 2016. I convened the hearing as 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
scheduled on October 18, 2016. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7 into evidence, which were admitted without objection from Applicant. 
He testified, but did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on November 2, 2016. The record remained open until November 18, 2016, to give 
Applicant an opportunity to submit other exhibits. He submitted five documents, post-
hearing. I marked them Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, and admitted them into the 
record without objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. He 
denied those alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g. SOR ¶ 2.a merely asserts all of the 
individual allegations in SOR ¶ 1 by reference under an additional guideline, so 
Applicant’s answers to those subparagraphs are the same under SOR ¶ 2.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old and unmarried. He graduated from high school in 2003. 
He subsequently attended college and trade school between 2006 and 2007. In 2014 
he began his current position with a defense contractor.  Prior to this position, he 
worked as an electrician. (Tr. 12-15.)  
 
When he completed a SF 85P in February 2014, Applicant disclosed a history of 
criminal conduct. (GE 1.) He subsequently discussed his arrests during interviews with 
a government investigator. (GE 2, 3.) 
 
In December 2006 Applicant was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle 
while intoxicated (OWI), possessing drug paraphernalia, and OWI with a blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) of 0.10 or more. Prior to the arrest, he was at a friend’s house 
where he consumed alcohol and used marijuana. He was 21 years old. In early January 
2007 the court revoked Applicant’s driver’s license for six months; fined him; and 
ordered him to undergo an alcohol assessment. He was also ordered to serve 30 days 
in jail, of which 28 days were suspended on condition that he not engage in similar 
behavior for two years. (Tr. 16-17; GE 2, 7.) 
 
In late January 2007 Applicant was arrested and charged with fourth degree 
driving while impaired (DWI), and a BAC of 0.08 within 2 hours of driving. In February 
2007 he pled guilty and was ordered to undergo a chemical dependence evaluation; 
fined; placed on unsupervised probation for two years; and required to obtain car 
insurance. He was again ordered not to engage in similar behavior for two years. The 
DWI was a misdemeanor conviction. (Tr. 17-18; GE 2, 6.) 
 
In April 2007 Applicant was arrested and charged with driving without a license in 
possession, and not having proof of insurance. He was fined and his driver’s license 
was again suspended. He was ordered to pay the fine by May 2007 or serve time in jail. 
He paid the fine. (Tr. 19; GE 7.) 
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In November 2007 Applicant was arrested and charged with disorderly conduct. 
The charge was dismissed in December 2007. (Tr. 19-20; GE 5, 7.) This allegation is 
found in Applicant’s favor. 
 
In March 2009 Applicant, age 23, was arrested and charged with possessing or 
having in possession/control a controlled substance. He pled guilty to the charge, a 
misdemeanor, and was fined. He said he was regularly smoking marijuana at that time 
in his life. (Tr. 22-23; GE 6.) 
 
In May 2011 Applicant, age 25, was arrested and charged with possession of 
drug paraphernalia, possession of a controlled substance (marijuana) by a driver, and 
driving without liability insurance. In June 2011 he pled guilty to two misdemeanor 
charges and was placed on unsupervised probation for two years and ordered not to 
violate criminal laws during that time. He received a 360-day jail term, suspended. He 
testified he no longer uses marijuana. (Tr. 24-25; GE 6.)   
 
In March 2014 Applicant, age 29, was arrested and charged with domestic 
assault - intentionally inflict/attempt to inflict bodily harm on another, domestic assault -
commit act to cause fear of immediate bodily harm or death, disorderly conduct - 
offensive/abusive/noisy/obscene, and damage to property - 4th degree. The incident 
involved his girlfriend, with whom he had a long term relationship. After discovering that 
she was seeing another man, he broke her cell phone. He pled guilty to the damage to 
property and the other charges were dismissed. He was fined; sentenced to 45 days of 
confinement, which sentence was stayed; and he was placed on probation for one year. 
(Tr. 26-28; GE 7.) He is no longer in a relationship with that girlfriend. (Tr. 32.)  
 
Applicant testified that since the March 2014 arrest he no longer consumes 
alcohol, uses marijuana, or associates with friends who use marijuana because they 
now have families. (Tr. 29-30.) He does not want similar incidents to affect his current 
position, as it is the “best job” he has ever had. (Tr. 30.) In addition to changing friends 
and appreciating his job, he works 60 hours a week, which gives him little time for 
abusing alcohol or drugs. (Tr. 31.)  
 
Applicant told his employer about this proceeding and the underlying 
trustworthiness concerns when he received the SOR. He also told his parents. (Tr. 34.) 
He is not certain if his employer has a zero tolerance policy about illegal drugs. (Tr. 35.)    
 
 Applicant submitted his performance evaluations for 2015 and 2016. His 
supervisor gave him “more than” effective ratings each year. (AE D, AE E.) His team 
leader wrote about Applicant, “in the nearly three years he has been with us . . . he has 
been, and will continue to be, one of our top performers.” (AE A.) This team leader is 
aware of Applicant’s criminal background. Applicant also submitted letters from his 
mother and father, both of whom believe that Applicant has learned from his mistakes 
and matured. (AE B, AE C.) 
 
 
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
Four of Applicant’s arrests and convictions involved the misuse of alcohol and/or 
marijuana. While his conduct in those instances was not alleged separately under the 
guidelines for alcohol consumption or drug involvement, said conduct is sufficient to 
raise a personal conduct trustworthiness concern. Applicant’s consumption of alcohol to 
the point of intoxication, and use or possession of illegal drugs on several occasions 
demonstrated questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and unreliability, as did his 
incidents involving driving violations and domestic violence. There is sufficient evidence 
to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
arising under this guideline: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Seven incidents of criminal conduct, four of which involved the abuse of drugs 
and alcohol, cannot be construed as minor offenses. Applicant’s last incident occurred 
in March 2014 and resulted in a year of probation. These facts continue to raise 
questions about Applicant’s judgment and are not mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant 
acknowledged his misconduct and no longer associates with people who abuse drugs 
and alcohol. He established some mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant’s family and 
employer are aware of his criminal conduct, thus reducing his vulnerability to 
exploitation based on those issues. AG ¶ 17(e) provides some mitigation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Between 2006 and 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged on seven 
occasions with criminal conduct. He was convicted of several crimes, some of which 
involved alcohol and illegal drugs. The evidence established the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a). Applicant’s history 
of criminal conduct spanned eight years and began in December 2006. His last arrest 
was in March 2014, after which he pled guilty to a charge and was again placed on 
probation. His continuing pattern of criminal conduct negates the argument that his 
behaviors were merely youthful indiscretions, but rather indicates that he was 
repeatedly advised and put on probation and told to stay out of trouble. Given that 
history, sufficient time has not elapsed, since his last conviction and completion of a 
criminal sentence, from which to determine that similar conduct will not recur. None of 
the offenses occurred under unusual circumstances. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence of successful rehabilitation. He displayed 
remorse about his conduct while testifying. He documented a good employment record 
for 2015 and 2016. Applicant’s team leader wrote an impressive letter about Applicant’s 
work and performance. Applicant’s parents believe that he matured over the last few 
years and is serious about changing his life. AG ¶ 32(d) provides some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 31-year-old 
man, who has a history of criminal offenses, some of which involved drugs and alcohol. 
As a consequence of committing those offenses, his driver’s license was suspended 
three times, and he was placed on probation three times. While he has demonstrated 
that he is taking steps to avoid similar misconduct, he has not established a sufficient 
track record of responsible behavior to outweigh his history of criminal conduct. After 
considering the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and circumstances 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in the context of the whole-person, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For these reasons, I conclude 
that Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guidelines 
for personal and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
                                Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
