                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 15-02734
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of Case
On October 22, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 4, 2016, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) in February 2016, and responded to the FORM with supplemental
information within the 30 days permitted. Applicant’s submissions were the comprised
of the following: appearance and satisfaction of state traffic tickets in April and July
2013, state franchise tax board billing and payment notice for tax year 2009, state
franchise tax board refund notices for tax years 2013 and 2014, federal tax refund
notices for tax years 2013 and 2014, and letter from non-SOR creditor. Applicant’s
submissions were admitted as Items 6-9.  The case was assigned to me on September
12, 2016. 
 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly incurred a state tax lien in 2011 for
$3,357 and (b) accumulated 16 delinquent consumer debts in excess of $19,000.
Allegedly, each of the listed debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the listed debts. He
denied the following allegations: SOR ¶ 1.a (debt was satisfied); SOR ¶ 1.e (duplicate
of  SOR ¶ 1.b); SOR ¶ 1.g (disputed debt); SOR ¶ 1.j (debt paid off);  SOR ¶ 1.l
(uncertainty about the debt);  SOR ¶ ¶ 1.m and 1.n (duplicates of SOR ¶ 1.d); SOR ¶
1.o (duplicate of SOR ¶ ¶ 1.b and 1.e); and  SOR ¶ 1.p (uncertainty about the debt).   
Findings of Fact
Background
Applicant is a 35-year-old help-desk contractor of a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
                                  
Applicant married in June 2006. (Item 2) He has no listed children from this
marriage. (Item 3) He claimed no educational credits beyond high school and no
military service. (Item 3) 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since October 2012. (Item 3)
Between April 2010 and October 2012, he was employed part-time as an operator for a
non-defense landscaping firm. He provided intermittent part-time work for this firm but
was never employed on a full-time basis. (Item 3)
Finances
Between April 2010 and October 2012, Applicant accumulated a number of
delinquent debts during periods of intermittent part-time work. Records reveal he
incurred a state tax lien of $3,357 in August 2011 covering tax years 2008 and 2009.
(Items 3-5) Additionally, he accumulated 16 delinquent debts approximating $20,000.
(Items 3-5) 
3
Applicant documented his satisfying the tax debts covered by his 2011 state tax
lien. (Item 7) This lien was satisfied in part by garnishment of Applicant’s wages, leaving
a balance owing of $1,182 as of May 2015. (Item 7) Applicant’s refunds of $462 for tax
year 2013 and $998 for tax year 2014 covered the balance of the amount owing for tax
years 2008 and 2009. (Item 8) Applicant did not provide any evidence of payments or
resolution of any of the remaining debts listed in the SOR.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
4
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a help-desk contractor of a defense contractor who accumulated a
number of delinquent debts (to include a state tax lien) during an extended period of
underemployment between April 2010 and October 2012. His accumulation of
delinquent debts and his past inability and unwillingness to address these debts
warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines:
5
DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c) “a history of not
meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)).
Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of his debts.
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to his inability to find meaningful full-
time work between April 2010 and October 2012.  One of his largest debts is a $3,357
state tax lien (SOR debt ¶ 1.a) that he has since resolved by a combination of wage
garnishment and tax refunds. He provided no evidence, though, of his paying or
otherwise resolving his remaining listed debts.
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s lengthy period underemployment
between April 2010 and October 2012. Available to Applicant in part is MC ¶ 20(b),
“the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly.”
In Applicant’s case, however, some judgment problems persist over his
accrued delinquencies and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in
addressing his listed debts once the underemployment conditions that contributed to
the delinquencies had passed or eased, and his finances had improved. See ISCR
Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only are his listed debt
delinquencies ongoing, but he has failed to address most of them in any tangible or
voluntary way.  Mitigation credit is not available to Applicant based on the evidence
developed in this record.         
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is
required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While
the principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also implicit in
financial cases. Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his
debts when able to do so raises security-significant concerns about whether the
applicant has demonstrated the trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified
information.
6
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of a state tax lien and other delinquent
debts. Since his return to full-time employment in October 2012, he has not shown
any manifest effort in addressing most of his covered debts to mitigate his still
delinquent accounts.  Even the resolution of his state tax lien did not entail voluntary
payment initiatives but was the result of a combination of wage garnishment and the
application of state tax refunds to the state taxes covered by the 2011 tax lien. 
Resolution of his delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining
control of his  finances, and Applicant to date has not made any manifest good-faith
efforts to resolve his debts. Moreover, Applicant did not provide any endorsements,
performance evaluations, or evidence of civic or community contributions to weigh in
his favor when evaluating his overall trustworthiness and reliability.  Overall, clearance
eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of information
available for consideration in this record does not enable him to establish judgment
and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt and his failure to provide more proof of corrective actions taken to
address his old debts, it is still too soon to make safe predictive judgments about
Applicant’s ability to repay his listed consumer debts and restore his finances to stable
levels commensurate with the minimum requirements for holding a security clearance.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.b through 1p.   Subparagraph 1.a is mitigated.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   Subpara.   1.a:      For Applicant
Subparas. 1.b through 1.p:      Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
7
                                        
  
