 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00483 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 17, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On July 13, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On October 22, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated December 29, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated 
January 8, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on February 17, 2016. He was afforded 
a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information within the 30-day period, 
which was received without objection.1 On September 13, 2016, the case was assigned 
to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and denied SOR ¶ 1.c, claiming that it 
had been paid.   
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old defense contractor employee who seeks a security 
clearance in conjunction with his current employment. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1981. He received a certificate for basic 
corrections recruit and for first aid for criminal justice officers in 2008, received a 
quartermaster certificate also in 2008, and took on-line college courses from 2009 to 
2010. (Items 4, 5) Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1979 to 1988, and was 
honorably discharged. After he was discharged, he completed enough years to vest a 
military retirement in 2011 after having served in the Army Reserve, Navy Reserve, 
Army National Guard, and Regular Army. (Items 4, 5) Applicant has been previously 
married and divorced three times. He has been in a relationship since 2005. He did not 
list any dependents on his SF-86. (Items 4, 5) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists three delinquent debts totaling $28,160. The first two debts 
are IRS tax liens entered against him in 2008 and 2011 in the respective amounts of 
$25,957 and $1,739. The third debt is a $464 cell phone collection account that has 
since been paid.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c; Items 1, 3 – 7, FORM response)  
 
In Applicant’s March 2014 SF-86, he stated that he was setting up a payment 
plan with the IRS to repay this debt. In his October 2015 SOR answer, he reiterated that 
claim. Department Counsel noted in his FORM that Applicant claimed that he attached 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as FORM response.  
 
2
 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
correspondence demonstrating payment plans, however, none was attached to his 
answer. In Applicant’s FORM response, he stated that his debt to the IRS will be paid, 
adding that he is currently making payment arrangements with the IRS. No 
corroborating documentation was attached to his FORM response. (Items 3, 4, FORM 
response)  
 
In his FORM response, Applicant stated that he is working diligently to secure a 
top secret security clearance to secure a better paying job and clear his debts. He also 
stated that he is a reliable employee and as a result of being laid off “for long periods of 
time,” he did not have the funds to pay his debts. (FORM response) Applicant’s record 
evidence did little to enhance his situation. Despite Applicant’s claims to the contrary, 
there is no documentation of any attempt over an eight-year period to contact the IRS or 
otherwise resolve his IRS debt. Nor is there any record evidence that Applicant sought 
financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets 
as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his March 2014 SF-86, 
May 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), 
October 2015 SOR answer, and April 2014 and December 2014 credit reports. (Items 
3–7) AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and  
 
                                                          
3
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s efforts to resolve his delinquent debt do not warrant full application of 
any mitigating conditions to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. However, 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) is fully applicable to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c because  
Applicant provided documentation that it has been paid. With regard to the remaining 
IRS tax liens, it is highly unlikely that Applicant has been unable to set up a payment 
plan with the IRS considering the first tax lien as filed in 2008 and the second in 2011. 
Absent documentation, his repeated claims that he has or is setting up payment plan 
ring hollow.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on an 
explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,4 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
                                                          
4
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
