 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08263 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his accumulation of a sizeable amount of delinquent debt after receiving a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy discharge in 2008. He has not obtained financial counseling and his 
financial situation is not under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), notifying him that his 
circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to address the security concerns. 
 
 On September 27, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice scheduling Applicant’s hearing for November 8, 2016. Applicant failed to 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
appear. Based on Applicant’s claim that he had not receive the notice, I rescheduled the 
hearing for December 1, 2016. The hearing was held on the rescheduled date.  
 
 At the hearing, the exhibits offered by the parties (Government Exhibits 1 – 5 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits A and B) were admitted into the administrative record without 
objection. Applicant testified at the hearing and afterwards submitted additional 
evidence (Exhibit C), which was also admitted into the record without objection. The 
December 1, 2016 hearing transcript (Tr.) was received by DOHA on December 13, 
2016, and the record closed on January 2, 2017.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, is a high school graduate with two years of college education. He 
is married and has six (living) children. His wife and children currently reside in State A, 
while he is working in State B. He has held a security clearance in connection with his 
employment as a federal contractor since approximately 2009. Currently, Applicant is 
employed as a construction security technician and has been with his present employer 
since approximately July 2014. 
 
 Applicant has experienced financial problems for several years. In 2008, he filed 
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and had over $35,000 in delinquent debt discharged. After the 
bankruptcy discharge, Applicant’s financial situation did not improve due to periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. His finances were further damaged when his 
daughter became ill and he incurred large, unreimbursed medical bills. His daughter 
passed away from her illness in 2016.  
 
The SOR lists 21 delinquent non-medical debts totaling over $58,000 for past-
due child support (about $18,000),3 rent owed for an apartment vacated in 2010 (nearly 
$4,600),4 traffic tickets in collection (about $1,700),5 repossessed vehicle or delinquent 
car loan ($15,000 past-due),6 and other consumer-related debt.7 He also has nearly 
$17,000 in delinquent medical debt related to his daughter’s illness and death.8 
                                                          
2 Prehearing scheduling correspondence and other administrative, non-substantive documents are 
attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I - VII. 
 
3 SOR 1.c and 1.e. Tr. 38-44. 
 
4 SOR 1.g. Tr. 55-56. 
 
5 SOR 1.x, 1.z, 1.cc – 1.gg. Tr. 55-56. 
 
6 SOR 1.b and 1.t. Tr. 52-53, 57-59. 
 
7 SOR 1.b and 1.t. Tr. 52-53, 57-59. 
 
8 The SOR references at 1.d, 1.i – 1.o, and 1.q – 1.s medical debts that, notwithstanding the total amount 
past due, are not particularly relevant in assessing Applicant’s security worthiness. Accordingly, these 
allegations are decided in Applicant’s favor. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has not addressed any of the SOR debts, except his delinquent student loan 
account that is being paid through an involuntary wage garnishment.9  
 
Applicant has not obtained financial counseling, because he does not believe his 
financial situation “is to the point that it’s unreasonable.”10 His current plan to resolve his 
financial problems is dependent on receiving an overseas assignment that will pay him 
a higher wage, which itself is contingent on maintaining a security clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.11  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
                                                          
9 SOR 1.h. Tr. 47-51; Exhibits A, B. 
 
10 Tr. 79. 
 
11 See also ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016); ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 2011). 
 
4 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The security concern under this guideline is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an individual with financial problems might be tempted to compromise 
classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses 
the extent to which an individual’s financial circumstances cast doubt upon their 
judgment, self-control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.12  
 
The record evidence establishes that Applicant has a long history of financial 
problems and is unable to pay his debts. This evidence raises the security concern at 
issue and the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) and 19(c).  
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the financial 
considerations security concern. I have considered all the potential mitigating conditions 
in assessing Applicant’s case, including the following:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were clearly impacted by significant matters largely beyond 
his control. However, he does not yet appreciate the depth and scope of the problem, 
nor the need to take action to address it, as evidenced by his failure to seek out and 
receive financial counseling. As of the hearing, the only SOR debt that was being 
addressed was one where the creditor was forced to secure a wage garnishment. This 
does not amount to a good-faith effort on Applicant’s part to address his past-due debts. 
After considering all the record evidence and based on Applicant’s long track record of 
not paying his debts, his promises to resolve his debts in the future are insufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by his present financial situation.  
 
 Specifically, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part, but is insufficient, even after 
taking into account the favorable whole-person factors in this case,13 including 
Applicant’s dedication to his family and years of holding a security clearance without 
apparent issue, to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial circumstances. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. 
They are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve 
the delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.14 Applicant failed to meet his burden. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with doubts about his present eligibility for continued 
access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
13 See generally AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
14 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c, 1.e – 1.h, 1.p, 1.t – 1.gg:      Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.i – 1.o, and 1.q – 1.s:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
