   
 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-06649 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not make sufficient progress resolving the debts alleged in his 
statement of reasons (SOR). He knowingly and intentionally denied that he had 
delinquent debts on his February 12, 2015 Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.       
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 12, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his SCA. (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On April 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit 
   
 
2 
 
 
(HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines F 
(financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). 
 
On June 3, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
July 20, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 30, 2016, the 
case was assigned to me. On September 30, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for October 26, 2016. 
(HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 4 exhibits; Applicant offered 11 
exhibits; and all proffered exhibits were admitted without objection. (Tr. 13-22; 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-J) On November 2, 2016, 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations except for 
the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old mechanical technician, who has worked for his 
employer since January 2015. (Tr. 6-7, 21; GE 1) In 2001, he graduated from high 
school. (Tr. 6) He has completed three years towards a degree in aerospace 
engineering. (Tr. 6) He is currently attending an aviation-related school. (Tr. 48) He has 
not served in the military. (Tr. 7) He has never married, and he does not have any 
children. (Tr. 7)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant fell behind on his finances in November 2010, after his driver’s license 
was suspended, and he was unable to work. (Tr. 24) His credit was excellent before 
November 2010. (Tr. 24) In 2010, he stopped making payments on the credit card 
accounts and student loans listed on the SOR. (Tr. 31) He explained that he did not 
resolve his debts sooner because he was less mature than he is now. (Tr. 26) He is 
also better organized. (Tr. 26) He said he was not fully aware of the magnitude of his 
debt until his Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). 
His financial situation was unstable until January 2015 when he began working for his 
current employer. (Tr. 31) His current annual salary is $75,000. (Tr. 45) He owns a 
business; however, any profits from his business are reinvested into his business. (Tr. 
44-45) His business account has about $10,000 in it, and his personal bank account 
has about $4,000 in it. (Tr. 46) He believes he has sufficient funds available to make 
payments on his debts. (Tr. 49)  
  
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
   
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SOR 
response, and hearing record. The status of his SOR debts is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a credit card account placed for collection in the amount of 
$17,166. Applicant provided a February 17, 2016 settlement offer from a collection 
agent, indicating the debt could be settled if he made 12 monthly payments of $590. 
(AE G) He wrote the creditor asking for validation that the collection agent was 
representing the creditor. (Tr. 20-21) He assured he was willing to pay the debt even 
though he is aware that the debt is so old it is not legally collectible. (Tr. 22, 25)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a charged-off credit card account in the amount of $7,485. On 
October 26, 2016, the creditor offered to settle the debt for $4,491 to be paid in six 
monthly installments beginning on October 31, 2016. (AE B) Applicant said he planned 
to make the six payments described in the creditor’s settlement offer. (Tr. 19, 28)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off credit card account in the amount of $3,137. 
Applicant made six monthly payments beginning in January 2016. (Tr. 29) On October 
26, 2016, the creditor wrote that this debt with a balance of $1,569 was settled in full on 
July 27, 2016. (Tr. 18-19; AE A) 
    
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges eight delinquent student loan accounts placed for collection in 
the amount of $29,410. In January 2016, Applicant entered into a loan rehabilitation 
program where he agreed to pay the creditor $5 monthly for nine months. (Tr. 32-33; AE 
C; AE D) Applicant said he made the first eight payments. (Tr. 19) On October 26, 2016, 
the creditor wrote that the loan would soon be rehabilitated. (AE C; AE D) Applicant has 
two additional student loans for $8,291 and $6,229, which are in deferment because 
Applicant is attending an aviation-related school. (Tr. 27, 33-35; AE E; AE F)    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Section 26, Financial Record, of Applicant’s SCA asks in the past seven (7) 
years: have “you had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?”; have “you 
had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed?”; have you “been over 120 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”; and are “you 
currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (GE 1)   
 
 Applicant answered “no” to these four questions. At his hearing he explained, “I 
kind of missed it. I should have been more careful. It was like an oversight on my part 
and I didn’t deliberately do that.” (Tr. 35-36) He continued, “It was like a long 
questionnaire. It took me a few days to finish and I would say I should have paid more 
attention to the financial part, and if I were to do it all over again, I would list everything.” 
(Tr. 37-38)  
 
 Applicant’s April 16, 2015 OPM PSI states, “Subject confirmed an answer of ‘no’ 
to all of the financial record questions. His overall financial situation is stable and fine 
with no issues.” (GE 2 at 11) An OPM investigator subsequently confronted Applicant 
   
 
4 
 
 
with the information on his credit report. (Tr. 36-37; GE 2 at 11-12) Applicant said he 
thought the accounts were no longer on his record. (Tr. 36-37) He conceded an honest 
answer to the OPM investigator would have included an acknowledgement that his 
history included some financial problems. (Tr. 51) He said he did not realize before the 
OPM interview that his finances were important in the security clearance process. (Tr. 
53)  
 
 Applicant failed to disclose a September 11, 2010 arrest, for driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI) on his SCA. (Tr. 38-39; GE 1; GE 2 at 9) He said he did not 
disclose the DUI arrest for four reasons: (1) it was dismissed before he went to court 
(the SCA specifies that dismissed charges are required to be reported); (2) he did not 
think it was that important because it was a “stop for suspicion” and not a charge; (3) he 
was not guilty of DUI; and (4) it was an oversight. (Tr. 38-41; GE 1) When he was 
stopped for the DUI, he was placed in handcuffs and his vehicle was impounded. (Tr. 
40) He had to pay a $500 fine. (Tr. 40-41) Applicant initially told the OPM investigator 
that he did not have SCA-reportable arrest information, and then after he was 
confronted with his record of arrest, he admitted that he was stopped for DUI. (Tr. 41; 
GE 2 at 9)   
 
 Applicant regretted his incorrect answers on his SCA and to the OPM 
investigator. (Tr. 54, 57) He promised to be more careful in the future. (Tr. 54, 57) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s 2015 performance review and his supervisor positively describe his 
character and work performance.2 The general sense of his performance review and 
statement indicate his is trustworthy, reliable, responsible, diligent, and professional. 
These two documents support approval of his access to classified information.      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
                                            
2 The sources for the facts in this paragraph are Applicant’s 2015 performance and a statement 
from his supervisor, who has known Applicant for three years. (AE I; AE J) 
   
 
5 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
  
   
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
   
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant presented some important mitigating information. Several 
circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances. Applicant had some 
periods of unemployment or underemployment before obtaining his current employment 
and his income was limited. However, he did not provide enough specifics about how 
these circumstances adversely affected his finances, and he did not show that he acted 
responsibly to address his delinquent SOR debts during his first year of his current 
employment (January 2015 to January 2016).        
 
Applicant is credited with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. He settled 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He made eight $5 payments to address his eight delinquent 
education debts, and he brought his eight student loans to current status. His student 
loans should be deferred because he is attending school. He is not credited with 
mitigating the other SOR debts because he did not provide sufficient documentation 
showing progress paying the debt, a reasonable dispute of any debts, or an inability to 
start payments on at least one more delinquent debt starting in January 2015.  
   
                                                                                                                                            
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
   
 
8 
 
 
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. There is insufficient 
assurance that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,   
. . . determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .4 
 
 Applicant falsely answered “no” to four questions in Section 26, Financial Record, 
of Applicant’s February 12, 2015 SCA, which asks in the past seven (7) years: have 
“you had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?”; have “you had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed?”; have you “been over 120 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”; and are “you 
currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (GE 1) AG ¶ 16(a) is established.  
 
  
                                            
4The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
   
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 lists five conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant failed to disclose important 
financial information on his February 12, 2015 SCA. When an OPM investigator 
interviewed him, he did not disclose his delinquent debts until he was confronted with 
his credit report. His failure to disclose his DUI arrest on his SCA and at the beginning 
of his OPM PSI is an indication that he did not want to disclose derogatory information 
on his SCA and to the OPM investigator.5 Personal conduct security concerns are not 
mitigated. 
  
  
                                            
5Applicant’s SOR does not allege that: (1) he initially lied to the OPM investigator when he denied 
knowing about any SCA-reportable delinquent debts in the previous seven years; (2) he failed to disclose 
a reportable DUI arrest on his SCA; and (3) he failed to disclose his DUI arrest upon request when his 
OPM interview began. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed 
five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 
14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
Consideration of these three allegations will not be considered except for the five purposes listed above.  
   
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old mechanical technician, who has worked for his 
employer since January 2015. In 2001, he graduated from high school, and he has 
completed three years towards a degree in aerospace engineering. He is currently 
attending an aviation-related school.   
 
Applicant’s 2015 performance review and his supervisor positively described his 
character and performance. The general sense of his performance review and 
statement is that he is trustworthy, reliable, responsible, diligent, and professional, and 
this information supports approval of his access to classified information. 
    
Applicant provided some important mitigating financial information. Applicant 
accrued delinquent debts in 2010, when he became unemployed. He did not establish 
stable employment until January 2015. He brought his student loans to current or 
deferment status, and he paid one delinquent SOR debt. 
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems exceeding five 
years. He has two unresolved delinquent debts totaling about $24,651. He contacted 
the creditors and learned he could settle the two debts for about $11,000. He did not 
start the payment plans to address either of these two debts. He did not provide enough 
specifics about how the circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his 
finances, and he did not show that he acted responsibly to address his delinquent 
debts. His failure to make greater progress resolving his SOR debts shows lack of 
financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s 
   
 
11 
 
 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.  
When he completed his February 12, 2015 SCA, Applicant intentionally and falsely 
denied that he had any delinquent debts meeting the criteria in the SCA in the previous 
seven years even though he knew that he had delinquent debts meeting the SCA’s 
criteria. Similarly he failed to disclose those same reportable debts at the start of his 
OPM PSI before being confronted with his credit report. He failed to disclose his DUI 
arrest on his February 12, 2015 SCA and at the start of his OPM PSI before being 
confronted with his arrest record. See note 5 supra.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that financial consideration and personal conduct security concerns 
are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     Against APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
