 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED]   )  ISCR Case No. 15-04531 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R, Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Andrea Batres, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to circumstances beyond his control, Applicant experienced 
financial difficulties, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on November 7, 
2014. On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on December 29, 2015, attaching his attorney’s 
December 28, 2015, entry of appearance, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 7, 2016, and 
the case was assigned to me on May 8, 2016. On July 6, 2016, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant’s counsel that the hearing was 
scheduled for July 27, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A through H, which were admitted without objection. I 
kept the record open until August 10, 2016, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX I through Q, which I have admitted 
without objection.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Three of the four past-due SOR debts are owed on mortgage loans: One on 
Applicant’s primary residence for $7,771 (SOR ¶ 1.a); and two on a rental property he 
purchased in 2003 for $3,027 and $1,179 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d). The fourth SOR debt of 
$1,091 is owed on a loan for a vehicle he purchased in 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c). These debts 
total approximately $13,068. In his Answer, Applicant neither specifically admits nor 
denies the allegations, but instead explains how each debt was incurred and describes 
some of his efforts to resolve them. Based on these statements, I conclude that 
Applicant has admitted his liability for each of the SOR debts. Applicant’s admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
The four delinquent accounts are corroborated by the November 2015 and 
November 2014 credit bureau reports (CBR) (GX 2; GX 3.) At the time the SOR was 
issued, each of these debts was in past-due status, as opposed to collection or charged 
off. The November 2015 CBR lists SOR debts 1.a and 1.c as not more than three 
months past due, SOR debt 1.b as not more than two months past due, and SOR debt 
1.d as over 120 days past due.   
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor in his 
current job since 2009. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1994 and a master’s degree 
in 1997. He and his wife married in 1998 and they have two children, ages 11 and 14. 
(GX 1; Tr. 62; Tr. 23.) 
  
Between 2002 and 2008, Applicant invested in seven properties, some as rental 
properties, some for resale, and his primary residence, most of which were financed 
with 30-year-fixed-rate mortgage loans. (Tr. 45-46.) Initially, Applicant’s investing was 
very successful, and in his best year, 2005, he made approximately $300,000 from the 
 
3 
 
 
sale and rentals on his properties. The majority of the 2005 profit came from the sale of 
his first investment property purchased in 2002, which he sold for nearly double the 
purchase price. (Tr. 57-58.) When the housing market crashed in 2008, Applicant 
owned five properties. Due to the overall economic downturn, the properties lost market 
and rental value and Applicant became financially overextended. He exhausted his 
savings and used credit cards to stay current on his mortgages and other financial 
obligations, but by 2009 was no longer able to do so. He has since struggled to maintain 
his financial obligations. Applicant invested in his final property in early 2008, before he 
was aware of the impending market crash. He is a one-third investor in a rental 
condominium. The market value of that property is currently less than the purchase 
price and he and the other investors are holding onto the property. They have had 
overall success in maintaining renters, and Applicant’s monthly out-of-pocket expense is 
about $600. His expenditures for the condominium and his remaining rental property are 
included in his monthly budget. (Tr. 59-61; AX Q.) 
 
Applicant has continuously worked to resolve his financial issues through 
repayment and restructuring instead of choosing to file bankruptcy. (Tr. 32.) In about 
2009, Applicant applied for a mortgage loan modification for his second mortgage loan 
on his rental property, but did not meet the criteria and was declined. In 2011, Applicant 
reapplied and successfully modified the loan, which helped prevent losing this property 
in foreclosure. (Tr. 28; Tr. 37.) The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.d that this loan is $1,179 past 
due. Although Applicant has periodically fallen behind on this account, he has generally 
maintained the payments, the account has not been in collection, and it is now current. 
(GX 2; Tr. 37)  
 
By 2011, Applicant had amassed significant credit-card debt, which ultimately 
totaled between $80,000 and $90,000. He consulted a credit-counseling company and 
developed a plan to retake control of his financial situation. (Tr. 30-33.) In 2012, he sold 
two of his rental properties, one in a short-sale, with the intention of using the profit of 
the other sale to pay down his credit-card debt, purchase a necessary second vehicle, 
and reduce his overall financial commitments. He contacted his five or six credit-card 
creditors, and worked out repayment schedules. He made his final credit-card payment 
in early 2015. (Tr. 30-32; Tr. 34.) The loan for the second vehicle is the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Applicant is now current on each of the SOR debts. Specifically, between March 
and July 2016, Applicant paid approximately $9,000 to bring the SOR debts current. He 
used the money from his savings account and borrowed about $2,000 from his vacation 
pay to make the last of these payments. Part of the reason his final payments were so 
recent is because he amassed as much vacation pay as possible before borrowing from 
that account. While their children were younger, Applicant’s wife worked part time. She 
returned to full-time employment in 2014 and earns $60,000 annually, which has 
increased her contributions to the household finances. (Tr. 25; Tr. 39.)  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant participated in additional financial counseling in 2016, reduced 
expenses, implemented and is following a written budget, has $0 personal credit-card 
debt, and lives within his means. The budget includes the full costs of the rental 
property when it is not rented. (Tr. 26-38; GX 2; Tr. 65-67; AX Q.) He has about $25,000 
in his 401(k). (Tr. 51.) He has about $1,000 in his savings account and is working to 
steadily increase the balance by following his budget, in order to pay any unanticipated 
expense without incurring debt. (Tr. 53-54; Tr. 57.) He has a net monthly remainder of 
about $1,400. (AX Q.) He has long considered selling the rental property, on which he 
owes about $197,000, and received an unsolicited offer of purchase for $290,000 on 
July 29, 2016. (AX N.) Applicant has not incurred any debt since the purchase of his 
vehicle in 2012. (GX 2; Tr. 33.) 
 
Applicant’s current supervisor of over seven years states that Applicant has a 
strong work ethic, is reliable and trustworthy, and exercises good judgment. Applicant’s 
supervisor further states that Applicant follows rules and regulations and has the ability 
to protect classified information. Applicant’s childhood friend, then later college 
roommate, strongly recommends Applicant for a security clearance. (AX F.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
6 
 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
  
 Although real-estate investing is necessarily speculative, Applicant was initially 
successful in his investments and was not financially overextended prior to the 
unforeseen housing market crash in 2008. Since recognizing the impact of the housing 
market crash on his financial circumstances, Applicant has acted responsibly by steadily 
making efforts to retake control of his finances. He has not made a real-estate 
investment since early 2008. Through 2009, Applicant exhausted his financial 
resources, including using his credit cards for living expenses, in an effort to maintain 
his mortgages. He first consulted with a credit-counseling company in 2011, and 
entered repayment agreements with his credit-card creditors in 2012, fully satisfying 
those agreements by January 2015. He again participated in financial counseling in 
2016, changed his spending and saving habits, is following a written budget, has no 
personal credit-card debt, and lives within his means. He is exploring the option of 
selling his rental property. None of the SOR debt was in collection or charged off, and 
the four accounts are now current. Applicant has not incurred any debt since his vehicle 
 
7 
 
 
purchase in 2012. The circumstances which led to Applicant’s indebtedness are unlikely 
to recur, and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
  
 Applicant acted in good faith by implementing a plan to keep his mortgages out 
of foreclosure and by ultimately bringing each of the SOR debts current. “Good faith” 
means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence 
to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 
12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a person’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines 
do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor 
do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 It is well established that payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for a 
security clearance does not warrant the same application of the mitigating conditions as 
a timely resolution of debts. See ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2009). However, while Applicant did not fully resolve his SOR debts until his hearing 
was pending, his actions to regain control of his finances began in earnest years earlier 
and establish a steady and sufficient track record of debt resolution. AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(d) apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant began addressing his debt in a responsible manner years before it had 
any potential impact on his security worthiness. He resolved a significant amount of 
credit-card debt by first seeking credit counseling and then implementing and satisfying 
repayment plans with his creditors. He proactively changed his spending and saving 
patterns and has not incurred any debt since 2012. He is trusted and respected by his 
long-time supervisor and close friend. I am confident that Applicant will continue his 
good-faith efforts to maintain his financial stability. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
