 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05815 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 20, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
10, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 21, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. She submitted a document that I have marked AE H and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 
30, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since February 2015. She has an associate’s degree and 
additional college courses, but she has not earned a bachelor’s degree. She married in 
2002 and divorced in 2006. She has a 14-year-old child.1 
 
Applicant had recurring periods of unemployment and underemployment before 
she obtained her current job. She also engaged in a costly custody battle over her child, 
which she eventually won. She lost a job when she moved to get away from her ex-
husband’s girlfriend. Applicant stated that the girlfriend made false allegations against 
her and persuaded four people to provide perjured testimony against her, which forced 
Applicant to accept a plea deal for a deferred adjudication. She cared for her father after 
he was critically injured in an assault. Her mother and brother lived with her for a period. 
Applicant took in her sister’s four children after they were removed from the home by 
child protective services. The children lived with Applicant for about a year. She was 
terminated from a job because of all the time she had to take off from work to care for 
the children.2 
 
The SOR alleges 22 delinquent debts totaling about $35,000. The debts include 
a student loan (SOR ¶ 1.a - $7,891); a deficiency balance on a car loan after 
repossession (SOR ¶ 1.d - $12,977); a public utility (SOR ¶ 1.b - $923); 
telecommunication companies (SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.k, 1.n - totaling $2,7103); a parking ticket 
(SOR ¶ 1.q - $100); ten medical debts totaling $8,292 (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, 
1.s-1.w); and four miscellaneous debts totaling $1,233 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.p, 1.r, 1.x). All of 
the debts are listed on at least one credit report.  
 
Applicant admitted that at one time she owed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.c, 1.d, and 1.v. She denied knowledge of the remaining debts. She stated that her 
mother and brother had access to her Social Security number and may have stolen her 
identity. In July 2016, she contracted with a law firm to remove items that do not comply 
with “various laws governing fair, accurate and substantiated consumer credit reporting” 
from her credit report. She also received financial counseling.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18, 55, 63-64; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-25, 51; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($496) and 1.k ($495) appear to be duplicates. I did not include SOR ¶ 1.k in the $2,710 
total. 
 
4 Tr. at 42, 47-48, 51-52, 58-60; GE 2; AE E. 
 
3 
 
Applicant stated that the $7,891 defaulted student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
paid through seizure of her federal income tax refunds for what she believed was the 
last three years, which would have been tax years 2013, 2014, and 2015. She provided 
no documentation to support that statement. When confronted with this debt during her 
background investigation in March 2015, she stated that she could not recall the loan. 
The debt is listed with a balance of $7,891 by all three credit reporting agencies on the 
March 2015 combined credit report. Equifax and Experian reported the debt as opened 
in September 2006; the date of last action as May 2008; and $5,634 charged off in 
October 2009. TransUnion reported the debt as opened in September 2006; the date of 
last action as June 2010; and $7,891 charged off on an unspecified date. The debt is 
not listed on the March 2016 and September 2016 Equifax credit reports.5 
 
Applicant admitted the $184 delinquent debt to a department store as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. She has not paid the debt. The debt is listed by TransUnion on the March 
2015 combined credit report. Applicant stated the debt was removed from her credit 
report. It is difficult to ascertain if TransUnion deleted the debt because the September 
2016 TransUnion credit report submitted by Applicant is missing a page.6 
 
The $12,977 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is the deficiency balance on a 
car loan for a luxury car that was repossessed in about 2008. Applicant admitted owing 
the debt. She has not paid it, but the collections account has been removed from her 
credit report.7 
 
Applicant denied owing the $923 public utilities debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and 
the $804 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x. The debts are listed by at least one of 
the credit reporting agencies in September 2016.8 
 
None of the remaining non-medical debts appear on any of the September 2016 
credit reports in evidence. Whether any of them appear on the missing page of the 
September 2016 TransUnion report is unknown. Applicant stated, without 
documentation, that she paid the $7,891 defaulted student loan and that she had 
payment plans for several of the medical debts. She has not paid any of the other debts 
alleged in the SOR. She owns two vehicles, and she has two car loans. To reestablish 
credit, she bought a used 2006 luxury car in April 2012, financed through a loan of 
about $13,000, with $371 monthly payments for 61 months. The car turned out to be 
unreliable, and she spent thousands in repairs. She was unable to sell the car because 
she owed more on the loan than the car was worth. She bought a used 2015 sport utility 
vehicle (SUV) in December 2015, financed through a loan of about $21,000, with $493 
monthly payments for 60 months.9 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 39-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE F, G. 
 
6 Tr. at 17-18, 42, 54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE F. 
 
7 Tr. at 21-22, 28-29, 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE A, F, G. 
 
8 Tr. at 41-42, 50-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE F, G. 
 
9 Tr. at 27-32, 5-56, 66-67; GE 3-5; AE A, F, G. 
 
4 
 
Applicant took in her sister and her sister’s four children after her sister’s house 
was destroyed in a fire in about June 2016. Applicant’s sister wrecked her car in 
September 2016. Applicant’s sister is now using one of Applicant’s cars. Applicant 
moved from an apartment to a house to accommodate her sister’s family. Her rent 
increased from $1,200 per month to $1,550 per month. Applicant has a student loan of 
about $26,000 that was scheduled to come out of deferment in October 2016. Applicant 
earns a reasonable salary, and her ex-husband pays child support. She has a budget, 
but it is not accurate, and it does not account for payments when the student loan 
comes out of deferment, and it does not include any payments toward her delinquent 
debts.10 
 
Applicant’s sister wrote that Applicant “is kind and has a huge heart and tries to 
take care of her entire family when bad times hit and she is there when needed she’ll 
give her shirt off her back and last cent to help others. . . . She is a loving, honest, loyal, 
trusting sister, daughter, and mother that will make ends meet for her family.”11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 19, 26-27, 33-37, 57-58; GE 1-5; AE B-D. 
 
11 AE D. 
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant had recurring periods of unemployment and underemployment before 
she obtained his current job. She engaged in a costly custody battle over her child. She 
lost a job when she moved to get away from her ex-husband’s girlfriend. She helped her 
parents, brother, sister, and her sister’s four children. She was terminated from a job 
because of all the time she had to take off from work to care for the children. Some of 
those events were beyond Applicant’s control. Although Applicant stated that the 
girlfriend made false allegations against her and persuaded four individuals to provide 
perjured testimony against her, Applicant accepted a plea deal for a deferred 
adjudication. Helping her parents, brother, sister, and her sister’s children is 
commendable, but voluntary.  
 
  Applicant stated the defaulted student loan in SOR ¶ 1.a was paid through 
seizure of her federal income tax refunds, but she provided no documentation to 
support that statement. The Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to 
expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” 
See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)).  
 
 Applicant denied owing most of the debts alleged in the SOR. I am crediting her 
with mitigating all the medical debts and the debts that do not appear on the September 
2016 credit reports. Left unresolved, with no plan to resolve them, are the $7,891 
defaulted student loan (SOR ¶ 1.a); the $923 public utilities debt (SOR ¶ 1.b); the $184 
department store debt (SOR ¶ 1.c); the $12,977 deficiency balance on the repossessed 
car loan (SOR ¶ 1.d); and the $804 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.x). 
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that she made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) 
(financial counseling) is applicable; the second part (clear indications that the problem is 
 
7 
 
being resolved or is under control) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. 
AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the disputed debts that do not appear on the September 
2016 credit reports. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered the favorable comments from Applicant’s sister and the assistance 
Applicant provided to her family. I also considered the factors that led to Applicant’s 
financial difficulties and the limited steps she has taken to rectify them. Applicant has 
not convinced me that she has a viable plan to address her finances. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.w:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.x:    Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
