 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-00072 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant voluntarily defaulted on two recent mortgage debts and falsely denied 
the existence of resulting financial issues on his security clearance application. Resulting 
security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on April 23, 2014. On 
August 28, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on September 24, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on April 19, 2016. The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 13, 
2016, setting the hearing date for June 3, 2016, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
without objection. Hearing Exhibits I and II were also entered into the record. Applicant 
offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection, and testified on his own 
behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until June 17, 2016, to 
permit him to submit additional evidence. On June 9, 2016, he submitted an email to 
Department Counsel stating that he had decided he would not submit a personal financial 
statement. (HE III.) He submitted nothing further while the record remained open, and it 
closed as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 13, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has worked 
since February 1979. He is a high school graduate who has completed some college 
courses without earning a degree. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1972 to 
1975, and was honorably discharged. He has held a security clearance for many years in 
connection with his employment, and is seeking to renew it. He is divorced, for the second 
time, with three adult children. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 7-9, 31-32.) 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c concerning his debts. 
Concerning each of those allegations he stated, “I did not intentionally by any means 
forget to address this issue on the Questionnaire.” These statements are interpreted as a 
denial of the SOR ¶ 2.a allegation that his “No” response to the SF-86 questions asking 
about foreclosures, collection or charged-off accounts, and delinquencies exceeding 120 
days during the preceding seven years constituted deliberate failure to disclose his two 
defaulted mortgage loans described in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
Applicant filed for, and was granted, discharge of his debts through Chapter 7 
bankruptcy proceedings in 1980 and 1999, shortly after each of his divorces. He also filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in 2003.1 He was questioned about, and explained, 
these financial issues to investigators, working for the Defense Investigative Service and 
Defense Security Service, in connection with security clearance investigations conducted 
in 1986 and 2004. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 54.)  
 
Applicant accepted an assignment working overseas for his company from August 
2005 to December 2008. In July 2005, he purchased a residential property as an 
investment, with a conventional mortgage loan for $156,400. His daughter and her family 
                                                 
1 These bankruptcies are not alleged as disqualifying information in the SOR, and will not be independently 
considered as such. However, they may and will be considered as evidence of Applicant’s knowledge, 
when completing his most recent SF-86, that financial issues can raise security concerns, and in evaluating 
potential mitigating conditions and whole-person factors. 
 
 
3 
 
 
initially lived in this home while Applicant was living and working overseas. In June 2007, 
Applicant refinanced the mortgage on this property by obtaining a $167,500 FHA loan 
from a different lender. Also during 2007, his daughter and her family moved to the other 
property, discussed below, and he rented the home to a family under the Section 8 
Housing Choice Voucher program. In October 2009, he refinanced the mortgage with 
another FHA loan from the original lender in the amount of $170,000. By early 2012, the 
property had fallen into severe disrepair and Applicant had to evict the Section 8 tenants. 
He could not rent the property in its condition, so he allowed his unemployed elder son to 
live there without paying rent. When Applicant could no longer afford this arrangement, 
while also paying rent for the apartment where he lived, he stopped making the mortgage 
payments in November 2012. The property was eventually sold in foreclosure 
proceedings in March 2015. As alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and admitted by Applicant, this loan 
was past due in the amount of $32,218 (24 monthly payments) with a total balance due of 
$162,940 when it went into foreclosure. (Answer; GE 2; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7; Tr. 32-40, 45.) 
 
In January 2007, Applicant bought another house, in a remote area, with a 
mortgage loan for $324,500. He thought it would be a good investment at the time, 
although he realized that he would have a hard time making the adjustable rate mortgage 
payments even with the low initial interest terms. His daughter, her family, and Applicant’s 
younger son moved to this property and lived there without paying rent. In early 2009 
Applicant decided he no longer wanted to own this house, and stopped making the 
required payments to the lender. This property was then sold in foreclosure proceedings 
during January 2010. As alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and admitted by Applicant, this loan was 
past due in the amount of $26,464 (12 monthly payments) with a total balance due of 
$315,460 when it went into foreclosure. (Answer; GE 2; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7; Tr. 39-45.) 
 
The September 23, 2015 credit bureau report that Applicant submitted with his 
Answer reflects the status of both of these defaulted mortgages as, “Foreclosure 
redeemed,” in the Remarks section. Under the state law where these properties are 
located a non-judicial foreclosure proceeding is permitted, but it precludes the lender from 
pursuing a deficiency judgment for any balance due in excess of the amount recovered by 
resale of the property after repossession by the lender. In the absence of any other record 
evidence, I conclude that the foreclosure proceedings extinguished any remaining debt 
that Applicant otherwise owed to either lender under these mortgage loans. Record credit 
reports show current zero balances due for both debts. (Answer; GE 6; GE 7; AE A.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $177 collection account that arose from an unpaid parking 
ticket issued to a car that Applicant bought for his daughter. He is the registered owner, 
but was unaware of the ticket until he signed up to receive a credit report. When he 
learned of the debt, he asked his daughter to take care of it. He subsequently challenged 
the credit report entry and was successful in having it removed from his credit report. This 
debt was not Applicant’s responsibility and is resolved. (Answer; GE 2; GE 5; Tr. 47-49.) 
 
During and after the time Applicant stopped paying his mortgage debts and his 
homes were going into foreclosure, he purchased a series of vehicles for himself and his 
 
 
4 
 
 
children on credit. In 2009 he purchased one vehicle for about $17,000. In 2011 he 
purchased three vehicles, incurring loans totaling about $44,000. In 2012 he purchased 
three more vehicles, incurring loan debts totaling about $93,000. All of those vehicles 
were either sold or traded in. Applicant currently owns two vehicles that he purchased for 
himself and his daughter in 2013, incurring loan debts totaling over $77,400; and one car 
that he purchased for his son in 2015 with another loan for more than $27,300. He has 
consistently made timely payments toward his vehicle loans. (AE A; Tr. 55-56.) 
 
When Applicant completed and certified the truthfulness of his answers on his April 
23, 2014 SF-86, he responded, “No” in response to Section 26 questions about 
delinquencies in the past seven years involving routine accounts. He specifically denied 
having any property repossessed or foreclosed; having any accounts suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; or having been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debts not previously disclosed. These denials were false in that he was 
well over 120 days delinquent on the two mortgage loans involved in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, 
and the foreclosure and debt cancellation concerning the latter property had been 
finalized four years earlier. (GE 1; GE 5; GE 7; AE A; Tr. 50-53.)  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence from supervisors, colleagues, associates, or 
family members concerning his character, trustworthiness, work performance, or track 
record with respect to following regulations and procedures relating to protection of 
sensitive information. He declined to provide a financial statement describing his present 
income, expenses, assets, and liabilities, despite having requested that the record be left 
open after the hearing in order to do so. (HE III.) 
      
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
 
 
5 
 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, A[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: A[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant chose to default on two large mortgage loans that he had voluntarily 
entered into within the preceding two or three years. One of these loans involved the 
second refinancing of a mortgage debt first obtained less than five years earlier, with 
about $13,600 in equity withdrawn. At around the same time, he took on significant 
additional secured debt to purchase a series of vehicles, toward which he devoted his 
available funds. This evidence casts doubt on his reliability and trustworthiness, raising 
both of the above disqualifying conditions and shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s mortgage delinquencies have been redeemed through the foreclosure 
process. He chose not to provide budget information showing whether he has sufficient 
funds to meet his ongoing financial obligations, but his credit reports reflect no new 
delinquencies. However, his recent unwillingness or inability to meet two major financial 
obligations remains of concern. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 
 
 
7 
 
 
20(a) or 20(b), since these choices were recent, voluntary, and not isolated to unique 
circumstances. There is no evidence that the financial problems are attributable to 
circumstances beyond his control, or that he has responsibly handled his financial 
obligations, which would be necessary to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant has not participated in financial counseling, and did not submit budget 
information to demonstrate that his financial problems are under control. He did not 
initiate a good-faith effort to resolve his mortgage debts, but instead chose to stop paying 
those obligations in favor of other consumption expenditures. This evidence establishes 
no mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d).  
 
Applicant provided a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the $177 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, which was not his responsibility and is now resolved. Accordingly, 
mitigation was established under AG ¶ 20(e) with respect to that minor debt. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
  
 AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant falsely denied having any property repossessed or foreclosed; having 
any accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; or having 
been over 120 days delinquent on any debts not previously disclosed during the 
preceding seven years, on his April 2014 SF-86. Having undergone substantial 
questioning about his previous financial delinquencies and three bankruptcies during his 
last two security reinvestigations, he certainly knew that his recent financial issues would 
raise relevant and material security concerns. His various explanations for not disclosing 
these financial problems are not credible. The evidence establishes a deliberate 
falsification as to this allegation. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that could mitigate the security concerns arising 
under this guideline in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
. 
AG ¶ 17(a) does not provide mitigation because Applicant did not make a prompt 
effort to correct the omission before being confronted with the facts. Intentionally 
withholding information from the Government is not a minor offense and does cast doubt 
on an individual’s judgment, so AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply to this recent falsification.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a lengthy history 
of financial irresponsibility. His three past bankruptcies were attributed to divorces from 
his former wives, but his recent defaults on two major mortgage obligations represented 
voluntary choices to abrogate voluntarily undertaken legal obligations. He falsely denied 
the existence of these financial issues on his most recent SF-86, seeking renewal of his 
security clearance. His actions neither eliminated the potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress, nor made the continuation or recurrence of security concerns unlikely. He did not 
 
 
9 
 
 
demonstrate rehabilitation or remorse concerning these irresponsible and dishonest 
decisions. Overall, the record evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant=s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
