 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-02907 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his financial situation. He 
did not provide sufficient evidence showing that he has responsibly addressed his 
delinquent debts. His failure to provide such evidence leaves security concerns raised 
by this delinquent debt unmitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a determination based on the administrative (written) record.  
 
 On February 3, 2016, Department Counsel prepared his written case, a file of 
relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the pleadings, 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA), a summary of his security clearance 
background interview (clearance interview), and several credit reports. These exhibits 
were pre-marked as Items 1 – 7 and admitted into the record without objection.  
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM and in a cover letter accompanying the 
FORM that he had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to submit a response, to 
include raising an objection to the evidence offered by the Government and providing 
documentation to corroborate his statements. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 9, 2016, but did not submit a response.2  
 
 On December 6, 2016, I was assigned Applicant’s case. On my own motion, I 
opened the record to provide him a final opportunity to submit a response.3 Applicant 
submitted a short e-mail response that was marked and admitted into the record as Item 
8. The record closed on December 29, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, who is in his early seventies, is married with two children. He is 
employed by a defense contractor as an engineer and has been with his current 
employer since 1999. He was in the inactive reserve with the U.S. Army from 1968 to 
1971, and received an honorable discharge. He has held a security clearance for many 
years. In 2012, he submitted an SCA as part of a periodic reinvestigation. 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his SCA and discussed during his clearance interview his 
delinquent accounts. He explained that his financial situation was negatively impacted 
by his own and his wife’s medical issues, which left her unable to work and forced him 
to take off time from work. He accepted a credit offer for a $50,000 personal loan, which 
he used to pay for household expenses while on medical leave. He was unable to pay 
back the debt and two other debts listed on the SOR. These three SOR debts went 
delinquent in about 2009 or 2010.  
 
 Applicant provided documentation with his Answer that one of the debts, a 
charged-off credit card account for $4,770 referenced in SOR 1.b was canceled by the 
creditor.4 SOR 1.b is resolved.  
 
Applicant also provided documentation with his Answer that his pay was 
garnished for the $50,00 debt referenced in SOR 1.c, which is the unsecured personal 
loan that he took out while on medical leave. His pay was garnished from December 
2011 to November 2013, and the debt was reduced to about $34,000. An October 2015 
credit report submitted by the Government with the FORM indicates that the account 
                                                          
2 FORM at 4; Appellate Exhibit (Ax.) I (cover letter and acknowledgment of receipt). 
 
3 See Ax. II. See also, Ax. III (administrative documentation that Applicant remains sponsored for a 
clearance by his employer). 
 
4 Item 2 at 10 (1099-C); Item 5 at 4 (2012 credit report reflecting same account number). 
 
3 
 
 
was closed in March 2014 with $0 past due, but incorrectly reflects that Applicant is 
deceased.5 Applicant has attempted to correct this wrong information, but did not submit 
any evidence as to what efforts he has made in the past three years to resolve the debt.  
 
Applicant also did not submit documentary evidence to corroborate his assertion 
that he made some payments towards the satisfaction of the $4,900 delinquent credit 
card debt listed in SOR 1.a. He claims that he recently attempted to reestablish a 
payment plan with the creditor. He discussed this debt during his October 2012 
clearance interview.6 The delinquent debts listed in SOR 1.a and 1.c, which total nearly 
$40,000, remain unresolved.  
 
 Applicant did not submit evidence of having sought or received financial 
counseling. The record is silent as to his current finances. In his response to the FORM, 
Applicant notes that he plans on retiring in the coming months and hopes to retain a 
clearance to continue working as a federal contractor until his retirement.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
                                                          
5 Item 2 at 5-9; Item 7 at 4. 
 
6 Item 4 at 3-4; Item 5 at 7, 12; Item 6 at 2. 
 
4 
 
 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an applicant with financial problems might be tempted to compromise classified 
information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent 
to which an applicant’s delinquent debts cast doubt upon their judgment, self-control, 
and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.7 
 
The record evidence reflects that Applicant has a history of not meeting his 
financial obligations and, at a minimum, has been unable to pay his debts. This record 
evidence raises the financial considerations security concern and establishes the 
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 Once disqualifying conditions are established, the burden shifts to an applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 
2016) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.15). The financial considerations guideline lists a number 
of conditions that can mitigate the security concern, including the following: 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were primarily attributable to his own and his wife’s 
medical issues. Understandably, it can take a person time to address and resolve 
financial problems stemming from matters beyond their control, especially those 
involving medical issues. Furthermore, a security clearance decision does not merely 
rest upon the resolution of all past-due debts alleged in an SOR. Instead, a judge 
examines the circumstances leading to the debt and the manner in which the person 
handles his/her financial situation to attempt to discern how they may handle their 
security obligations. See ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013). 
 
 In the present case, Applicant incurred the delinquent debts at issue 
approximately seven years ago. The record is devoid of any evidence reflecting 
voluntary action on Applicant’s part to address his delinquent accounts and take control 
of his finances. Notably, the garnishment for the debt referenced in SOR 1.c ended over 
three years ago, reducing the overall balance from over $50,000 to approximately 
$34,000. Applicant presented no evidence that he has attempted to work out a payment 
plan to resolve the remainder with the creditor, who appears to have stopped trying to 
collect on the debt after Applicant was incorrectly reported as deceased. Under these 
circumstances, none of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s accumulation of 
delinquent debt totaling nearly $40,000 and failure to submit clear, concise, and 
unambiguous evidence showing responsible action on his part to resolve his financial 
situation leave the security concerns at issue unmitigated.8  
                                                          
8 Applicant admitted the two SOR debts referenced in 1.a and 1.c. One no longer appears on the most 
recent credit report admitted into the record, while the other delinquent account is listed with a zero past-
due balance. However, as this recent credit report (Item 7) also lists Applicant as deceased, this 
 
6 
 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. 
They are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve 
the delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.9 Applicant failed to meet his burden. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 An administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the relevant 
circumstances, including the whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I gave due 
consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, including 
Applicant’s years of holding a security clearance and the unfortunate circumstances 
leading to his financial problems. However, after weighing the favorable and 
unfavorable evidence, Applicant’s financial situation continues to raise a security 
concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about his present eligibility 
for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
presumably favorable information is of questionable reliability and of limited evidentiary value in 
assessing his continued suitability to hold a security clearance. See ISCR Case No. 15-03527 (App. Bd. 
Dec 29, 2016) (adverse decision upheld where applicant failed to present clear evidence regarding 
his/her efforts to address an SOR debt that no longer appeared on his credit report).  
 
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
