 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06016 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 3, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 25, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 26, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 7, 2016. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel provided Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which is a demonstrative exhibit. 
Applicant testified and did not offer any documents. I held the record open until 
December 27, 2016, to permit Applicant an opportunity to provide additional documents, 
which he did. He provided one document that is marked AE A, and I admitted it without 
objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 15, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.p to reflect the evidence by 
changing the amount alleged to $4,581. There was no objection and the motion was 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He graduated from high school and attended college 
for two and a half years, but did not earn a degree. He was a full-time student from 2006 
to 2008. He then took off a semester and attended a different college part time from 
2009 into 2010, while also working. He had difficulty working and going to school at the 
same time. He worked from 2011 to 2013. He began working for his current employer in 
August 2013. He is not married and has no children.2 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($6,044), 1.b ($3,602), 1.n ($24,878), 1.o ($9,276) and 
1.p ($4,581) are student loans. Applicant testified that in early 2014 he was making 
monthly payments on student loans. Then in the summer of 2014 he contacted the 
creditors for the loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.p and made two lump sum payments 
totaling $13,000. Credit reports reflect these loans were settled. Applicant testified he 
made monthly payments on the loan in SOR ¶ 1.o and in October 2008 he settled the 
account for $5,500. He provided proof the account is resolved. He was aware he owed 
other student loans and attempted to make arrangements to pay them in May 2015, but 
the plan was never implemented. He intends to arrange a payment plan and pay these 
loans.3 
 
 From 2011 through 2013, Applicant had health problems and incurred medical 
debts. He was uninsured and unable to pay them. They are reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
through 1.g, 1.i through 1.m, and 1.q. They have not been paid or resolved.4  
                                                          
1 HE II is Department Counsel’s email response that she did not object to the AE A. 
 
2 Tr. 15-24. 
 
3 Tr. 20, 27-45, 53-58; GE 2 at page 8, GE 4; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. 19, 46-47, 58. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant defaulted on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,444) in approximately 2009. It is 
not paid. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($285) is an overdraft on an account. Applicant was 
unaware of it until he received the SOR. He has not resolved it. Applicant disputed the 
charge from his utility company as an inaccurate amount owed. The utility account in 
SOR ¶ 1.k ($200) is reflected in Applicant’s credit report as in collection. It is 
unresolved. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.r ($424) is a cell phone account. Applicant believed it 
was paid, but did not provide documented proof.5 
 
 Applicant received some financial counseling in 2014 and was advised to save 
some money so he is in a better financial situation to pay his bills. He earns about 
$56,000 annually after taxes and now has medical benefits. He has some money in 
savings so he can take a licensing test that if he passes will increase his income and 
ability to repay his debts.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
                                                          
5 Tr. 42, 45-53, 58.GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. 61-72. 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant has unresolved financial delinquencies. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has numerous debts including student loans that are unpaid or 
unresolved. He began incurring the loans and defaulted on them after he left college in 
2010. He has numerous medical and other debts that are not paid. There is insufficient 
evidence to apply AG ¶ 20(a) as Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and not 
resolved. His financial difficulties did not occur under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant’s medical debts were beyond his control when they were incurred 
because he did not have medical insurance. The other debts, especially his student 
loans, were within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. He did not provide evidence that once he 
was gainfully employed he contacted the creditors to resolve his medical debts. He did 
make lump-sum payments to resolve three student loans. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 Applicant participated in some financial counseling in 2014. He paid three of his 
student loans before he received the SOR. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.o, and 
1.p. Applicant still has many delinquent debts that he has not paid. There is insufficient 
 
6 
 
 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The first part 
of AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Although Applicant disputed some debts, he did not provide 
documents to substantiate his dispute or evidence that he is resolving the issues. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 30 years old. He paid three of his student loans before he received 
the SOR. I found his testimony credible that he intended to pay the remaining loans. He 
has numerous other delinquent debts that he has not yet resolved. At this juncture, 
Applicant does not have a reliable track record of responsibly addressing his financial 
obligations. Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations guideline security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.p:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q-1.r:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
