1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-07075
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his finances and his personal
conduct. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations, and E, personal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations in Paragraph 1
except SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.I,. He did not respond to the allegations in Paragraph 2. He
requested a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on August 11, 2016.
2
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 24, 2016, scheduling the hearing for
October 6, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, I considered the
testimony of Applicant and three witnesses, and I received five Government exhibits
(GE1 - GE 5), and five Applicant exhibits (AE) A - AE E). All were admitted without
objection. At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s request, to
allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he
submitted five additional exhibits (AE F - AE J) that I incorporated into the record
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 13, 2016.
Preliminary Ruling
SOR Paragraph 2 alleges falsifications based on omissions of relevant financial
information regarding child support (¶ 2.a), past judgments (¶ 2.b), a car repossession
(¶ 2.c), bills referred to collection agencies (¶ 2.d), and bills currently more than 120
days late (¶ 2.e). At the close of the case, Department Counsel conceded all of the
allegations in Paragraph 2 except ¶ 2.c. Consequently, I resolve all of these in
Applicant’s favor and will only address ¶ 2.c in the analysis section of the Decision.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old married man with three children, ages 19, 10, and 5,
and one stepchild, age 13. He has been married since 2010. A previous marriage
between 1995 and 2004 ended in divorce. His youngest child is from his current
marriage. For the past two years, Applicant has worked on a military base in warehouse
support. (Tr. 17) In this capacity, he manages the flow of equipment in and out of the
warehouse. 
Applicant is well-respected on the job. According to his supervisor, he is a man of
high character who respects everyone who comes into the warehouse. (Tr. 52) Per a
higher-level supervisor, Applicant is always “attentive to the needs of his leadership and
the greater organization.” (AE I)
Between 2010 and 2012, Applicant incurred approximately $12,000 of delinquent
debt, including the deficiency owed to a creditor for a repossessed car ( SOR ¶ 1.a), two
medical bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d), three utilities (¶¶ 1.c, 1.h, and 1.i), delinquent child
support (SOR ¶ 1.e), and an unidentified bill (SOR ¶ 1.g). His financial problems
occurred when he was disabled by a work-related injury. Although he was awarded
worker’s compensation insurance benefits, they only covered 60 percent of his income.
(Tr. 18) During part of the period Applicant was disabled by a work-related injury, his
wife was on bed rest and unable to work  because of a difficult pregnancy. (Tr. 31, 48)
At or about the time Applicant was disabled, his car engine failed. Unable to afford both
the engine’s repair costs and the ongoing car payments, Applicant returned it voluntarily
to the dealer in 2010. (Tr. 18, 30) Subsequently, the dealer obtained a judgment against
Applicant in the amount of $7,781, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Answer at 1) In October
2016, Applicant contacted the creditor and organized a payment plan. (AE A) He made
his first monthly payment, totalling $150, that month. (AE F) 
3
 
Applicant contends that he paid the medical bill, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, totalling
$98. He did not provide documentary evidence. 
SOR ¶ 1.c, totalling $3,464, is a delinquent utility bill which Applicant disputes.
He contends that it was not his responsibility as he was no longer living at the property
that was using this utility service provider. (Answer 5-7) In support of this contention,
Applicant provided a letter from his current landlord confirming when he had moved into
his current residence, and he provided a letter that he wrote to the utility company about
the contested debt. (Answer at 6-7)
Applicant contends that he paid the medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, totalling
$89. He provided no documentary evidence. Applicant contests the child support
delinquency, allegedly totalling $964, as listed in the SOR ¶ 1.e. He provided evidence
establishing that he neither owed additional child support, nor was currently behind on
child support payments. (AE C) He admits getting behind on his child support payments
during the period that he was temporarily disabled. (Tr. 45; GE 2 at 9)
Applicant denies SOR ¶ 1.f, allegedly totalling $143, and SOR ¶ 1.i, allegedly
totalling $202, as he has no record of them.  Applicant denies owing the medical bill
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, totalling $89, contending that he satisfied it. He provided no
documentary evidence. Applicant satisfied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. (AE H) 
Applicant has been working with a credit counselor since May 2016. With the
counselor’s help, he prepared a budget. (AE A at 4) Accounting for his household
expenses and the $150 monthly payment towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a,
Applicant has nominal discretionary income.
Applicant completed a security clearance application in November 2014. In
response to Section 26, “in the past seven (7) years [have] you had any possessions or
property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed?,” Applicant answered
“no,” and did not disclose the voluntary repossession of his car in 2010. Applicant
testified that he knew when he completed the application that the car had been
voluntarily repossessed, but that he “didn’t understand the question.” (Tr. 36)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Applicant’s delinquent debt triggers the application of  AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.” 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debt; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by a period of work-related disability
that overlapped with his wife’s pregnancy-related difficulties that prevented her from
working. Since then, Applicant has satisfied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e,
Applicant did not provide documentary evidence supporting his contention that he satisfied SOR  ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d,1
and 1.g. Given the nominal amount of these debts, and given that Applicant provided proof of payment for the
substantially higher debts alleged in SOR  ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h, I concluded that his testimony as to these smaller
debts was credible.
SOR ¶ 1.c approximately ten times greater than the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i, combined.2
5
 
1.g, and 1.h.  In  May 2016, Applicant retained a  credit counselor to help him organize1
his finances, and in October 2016, he organized a payment plan with the creditor
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. That month, he made his first payment of $150, as agreed. Given
the cause of Applicant’s financial problems and the progress that he has made in
resolving them, I conclude AG ¶¶ 20(b) through 20(d) apply.
Applicant’s explanation for disputing SOR ¶ 1.c constitutes a reasonable basis to
dispute the legitimacy of the debt.  He provided copies of both the letter he wrote to the
creditor and a letter from his landlord establishing that he was not living in the residence
when the utility bill was incurred. He provided no evidence substantiating the basis of
his dispute of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.f and 1.i. Nevertheless, given the
significance of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c compared to SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i,  I2
conclude that AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information ”(AG ¶ 15). Applicant’s omission of his voluntary repossession from his
security clearance application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” applies.
Given Applicant’s strong character references, I conclude that his testimony that
he did not understand the question about voluntary repossessions on his security
application was credible. There are no personal conduct security concerns.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
6
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant did not experience financial hardship as a result of profligate spending.
Instead, his financial difficulties were caused after he was temporarily disabled in a
work-related accident at or about the same time that his wife was temporarily unable to
work during a difficult pregnancy. Applicant has organized his finances, satisfied several
debts, and organized a payment plan for the most significant outstanding debt. Under
these circumstances, I conclude that the presence of rehabilitation is strong, and the
likelihood of recurrence of his financial problems are minimal. Applicant has mitigated
the security concern.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
