 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05597 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 3, 2016, and he elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 4, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on April 13, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns.  Applicant 
provided a FORM response on April 30, 2016. The case was assigned to me on 
December 15, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-3.1  FORM Item 3 
is an unauthenticated summary of a December 16, 2014 interview with a government 
background investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that he 
could object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by 
me. Applicant responded to the FORM, and he raised no objections. Given Department 
Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s education and work experience, I find his waiver 
to be knowing and intelligent.2  Therefore, FORM Item 3 is admitted into evidence as 
Government Exhibit 3. 
 
FORM Item 2, a September 2014 security clearance application (SCA) is 
admitted into evidence as Government Exhibit (GE) 2, without objection.3 
 
In his FORM response, Applicant included a two-page letter, which is admitted 
into evidence as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. From March 1979 to March 1999, he served active duty 
in the U.S. military, from which he received an honorable discharge. Following his 
military retirement, he worked for multiple DOD contractors, and he had some extended 
periods of unemployment. He has been employed full time by a DOD contractor since 
September 2014.4 
 
 Applicant received his general equivalency degree (GED) while serving in the 
military. In September 2008, he attained his bachelor’s degree. Since July 2013, he has 
been pursuing an associate’s degree, and he intends to pursue a second bachelor’s 
degree. 
                                                          
1 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR.  These documents are 
pleadings and are part of the record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.  The Judge’s exclusion of the Report of Interview, containing 
mitigating evidence, was found to be error following an applicant’s appeal.).   
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 14-06781 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016)(By not responding to the Government’s 
FORM, “Applicant waived any objection he might have had to this document.”). 
 
4 GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was married in May 1984, and he has been separated since December 
2010. He and his wife have two adult children.5 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct on multiple 
occasions between 1990 and 2014. In his response to the SOR, Applicant neither 
explicitly admits nor denies the specific SOR subparagraphs; however, he does admit 
specific criminal behavior. 
 
 In 1990, Applicant was charged with (1) Unlawfully Carrying a Pistol and (2) 
Disorderly Conduct. Applicant explained that he had been given several firearms 
following the death of his stepfather, and that he was transporting the firearms from 
Missouri to South Carolina for registration and proper storage. En route, he fell asleep 
and was startled by law enforcement. One of the firearms was confiscated.6 Although 
Applicant admits that he was arrested, there is no evidence of any formal charges or 
convictions, and Applicant stated that no punishment or sentence was imposed.  
 
 In 1992, Applicant was charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI). He 
admitted the arrest, but was found guilty of a lesser offense (Reckless Driving) and 
fined.7 The 1990 and 1992 arrests are listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c. alleges that Applicant was charged with Reckless Driving in 2007. No 
record evidence was offered to substantiate this allegation. 
 
 In 2008, Applicant was charged with (1) Driving While Impaired (DWI); (2) 
Reckless Driving; and (3) Open Container. Applicant admits his blood alcohol level 
exceeded the legal limit and that he was charged with DWI/DUI. He pled guilty.  He 
received a suspended jail sentence, was fined, and was ordered to complete alcohol 
education.8 This incident is listed in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant was charged with DUI – 2nd Offense.  He pled guilty. He was 
sentenced to 90 days in jail, fined, and ordered to complete alcohol education. This 
conviction is referenced SOR ¶ 1.e.9 
 
 As a result of the 2010 conviction, Applicant’s driver’s license was suspended. At 
the time, he believed that he was granted a restricted license for travel to and from 
work. In 2014, Applicant was charged with Driving after Forfeiture of License, and he 
was subsequently cited for Failure to Appear on this charge. Applicant was under the 
mistaken impression the court hearing had been continued. The charges were handled 
                                                          
5 GE 3; AE A. 
 
6 Response to SOR; GE 3; AE A. 
 
7 GE 3; AE A. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
9 GE 3. 
 
4 
 
concurrently, and he was fined approximately $260.10 These 2014 matters are listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.g. 
 
 Applicant has taken full responsibility for his past criminal conduct and poor 
judgment.  He has taken several steps to ensure that such incidents do not to recur. 
Most importantly, he has not consumed any alcohol since his 2010 DUI arrest.  He has 
moved across the country for his new employment, he holds a leadership position in a 
trade association, and he mentors at-risk youth. He has returned to school and has 
excelled academically.11   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”12 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
10 GE 3. 
 
11 GE 3; Response to the SOR; AE A. 
 
12 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 
F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.”  
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses”). Applicant’s criminal conduct in 1992, 2008, 2010, 
and 2014 triggers AG ¶ 31(a). Because the Government did not present substantial 
evidence of any criminal behavior as to the 1990 incident (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and did not 
present any evidence as to the alleged 2007 incident (SOR ¶ 1.c.), it did not meet its 
evidentiary burden as to these two allegations. 
 
Security concerns raised by criminal conduct may be mitigated by the following 
conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 32(a) focuses on whether the criminal conduct was 
recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The 
 
6 
 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence.13 If 
the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”14 
 
While not dismissing or disregarding the 2014 charges, Applicant’s criminal 
conduct predominantly occurred over six years ago. Applicant was responsible and 
criminally culpable for the 2014 charges, resulting from his forfeited driver’s license. 
However, his erroneous belief that he had a restricted license is reasonable. More 
importantly, Applicant’s relocation across the country, his sobriety, new employer, and 
academic endeavors have cultivated an environment that such criminal behavior is 
unlikely to recur. Considering the totality of Applicant’s criminal behavior, sufficient time 
has elapsed and the contributing circumstances are unlikely to recur, such that his past 
criminal conduct does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Therefore, AG ¶ 32(a) applies. 
 
As discussed above, Applicant has excelled academically, he has attained a 
leadership position in a trade association, and he serves as a mentor to at-risk youth. 
He relocated away from the circumstances and situations linked to his past criminal 
behavior, and he has been sober for at least six years. Critical to his successful 
rehabilitation is Applicant’s unconditional acknowledgement of his past poor judgment 
and criminal conduct. Given the totality of the evidence, I conclude that AG ¶ 32(d) 
applies.  
 
Applicant has accepted responsibility for his past criminal behavior. Sufficient 
time has elapsed, circumstances have changed, and Applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation to sufficiently mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 Under Guideline E, the SOR cross-alleges the criminal conduct previously 
alleged under Guideline J. Criminal behavior or rule violations trigger AG 16(d)(3): 
 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
14 Id. 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information.  This 
includes but it not limited to consideration of: 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty of rule violations. 
 
Applicant’s criminal behavior spanned five incidents over a 22-year period.15 
Thus, AG ¶ 16(d)(3) applies. 
  
 The following mitigating condition is potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(d):  the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused the 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur: 
 
 As discussed above, Applicant has unconditionally accepted responsibility for his 
past criminal behavior. His relocation, new employer, constructive community 
involvement, and sobriety, are all positive steps to alleviate the stressors, triggers, and 
circumstances that contributed to his past misconduct. Thus, AG ¶ 17(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
15 The Government did not establish any criminal conduct as to SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c. 
 
8 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
In light of all the facts, I have considered the potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J and E and 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant sincerely acknowledges his past poor judgment and criminal behavior, 
and he presented tangible evidence of rehabilitation and lifestyle changes – namely his 
sobriety and academic endeavors. Taken with his honorable military service and other 
changed circumstances, such criminal behavior and poor judgment are unlikely to recur.  
I conclude Applicant sufficiently mitigated the criminal conduct and personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.g.:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.    For Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
