1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-06428 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s one-time marijuana use while holding a security clearance was 
unintentional, is not likely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment. Applicant has mitigated the Guideline H security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on January 9, 2015. 
On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline H. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Ex. Or.)10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 22, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 28, 2016, 
and the case was assigned to me on June 30, 2016. On June 30, 2016, the Defense 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for July 25, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and  
Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A was admitted without objection. I kept the record open until 
August 8, 2016, to enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely 
submitted AX B through D, which I have admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on August 2, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant tested positive for marijuana in a random drug 
test given by his employer on December 2, 2014. Applicant admits the SOR allegation.  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old quality inspector employed by his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since 2011. He was first granted a security clearance in 2010. (GX 
1.) His former supervisor, who supervised Applicant before his January 2015 promotion, 
highly recommends Applicant for a clearance, stating that he is reliable, professional, 
and ethical. A friend of more than 23 years recommends Applicant, describing him as 
“dependable, responsible, honest, and courteous.” (AX A.) A friend from college states 
that Applicant has good moral character and judgment. (AX B.) 
 
Applicant has used marijuana on only two occasions in his life. (GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 
20.) One night in 2007, just after graduating from high school, Applicant and a childhood 
friend visited various fraternity houses at a local college and experimented with 
marijuana at one of them.  Afterwards, Applicant became ill and he never intentionally 
used it again. (GX 2; Tr. 20.) In November 2014 Applicant’s childhood friend and his 
brother, who were in town for the Thanksgiving holiday, visited Applicant at his home. 
Applicant was aware that these friends used marijuana, but had always been able to 
distance himself from it. The three friends celebrated by drinking a lot of alcohol. At 
some point, they decided to smoke cigars. One of the friends had brought several 
cigars, one of which also contained marijuana. Applicant told his friend he did not want 
the “altered” cigar. The three men smoked the cigars, and not long after, Applicant 
became ill. The following morning, he attributed this illness to drinking too much alcohol. 
He testified that he did not taste or otherwise notice the marijuana because of the 
amount of alcohol he had consumed. (GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 18-20.) 
 
On December 2, 2014, the following Tuesday, Applicant and about five other 
employees were subjected to a random drug test. The screening was the first one 
Applicant had ever given. On December 9, 2014, Applicant was shocked when he was 
informed by his employer that he had tested positive for marijuana. (Tr. 22.) Per 
company policy, he was suspended for five days. He was also required to participate in 
an educational drug counseling program and submit to random drug testing. (GX 3; Tr. 
30; Tr. 32.) Applicant attended six one-on-one counseling sessions and successfully 
completed the program on January 30, 2015. (AX D.) His drug tests, including those 
administered in February, June, and November 2016 were all negative. (AX C; Tr. 32.)   
 
3 
 
Applicant is remorseful about this incident and states that, while unintentional, it 
was nonetheless due to his poor judgment. (Tr. 18.) As a result of this incident, 
Applicant has learned to exercise better judgment about his surroundings and his 
friends. He confronted his childhood friend over the telephone several months after the 
incident, and the friend confirmed that Applicant had smoked part of the altered cigar. 
He no longer associates with his childhood friend or his brother or other people who use 
marijuana. He has no future intent to use marijuana and he has cut back on his use of 
alcohol. (GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 38.) Applicant’s account of his inadvertent use of marijuana 
has remained consistent. (GX 1; GX 2; Answer, Tr. 19-20.)  
 
Applicant is dedicated to and takes pride in his job and would not intentionally 
jeopardize it. (Tr. 38.) His testimony was sincere, contrite, and unwavering. When 
queried about the unlikeliness of undergoing the only random drug screening he had 
ever been subjected to, Applicant stated, “It's just horrible luck. There's no way to 
explain it other than it's just bad timing or else I wouldn't have known that I even had 
done it since 2007.” (Tr. 35.) 
   
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
4 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish the 
potential application of AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse,” defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction,” AG ¶ 25(b) “testing positive for illegal drug use,” and AG ¶ 25(g): 
“any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation, and  
 
AG ¶ 26(d): satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s one-time use of marijuana in November 2014 occurred over two 
years ago in unusual circumstances. He used poor judgment under the circumstances 
and accepts responsibility for his actions. He has matured and no longer associates 
with people who use marijuana and does not put himself in perilous situations. He 
successfully completed the educational drug treatment program required by his 
employer, and passed all of the multiple subsequent random drug tests. His inadvertent 
use of marijuana does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. All of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
6 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but I have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant’s testimony was sincere and his account of his inadvertent use of 
marijuana was consistent throughout the adjudicative process. He fully accepted 
responsibility for placing himself in a precarious situation and has taken multiple 
measures to prevent the recurrence of such circumstances. He is respected at his job 
and was promoted in January 2015, not long after this incident. He has held a clearance 
for more than five years.   
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug use. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
