 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00749 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 5, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On December 7, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated January 26, 2016, was provided to him by letter dated 
January 28, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on February 23, 2016. He was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information within the 
30-day period, which was received without objection.1 On September 13, 2016, the 
case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d.   
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old consultant employed by a defense contractor since 
June 2014. He seeks to renew his security clearance that he held over 20 years that 
“lapsed while [he] was in between Air Force software development contracts.” (Items 1, 
2, 3)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1986. He served in the U.S. Air Force 
from 1986 to 1996, and was honorably discharged. He held a security clearance while 
in the Air Force. Applicant married in 2000 and divorced in 2009. He remarried in 2011. 
He has sole custody of four children and one stepchild from his first marriage, and 
shares custody of two stepchildren with his second wife. (Items 1, 2, 3) 
  
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR contains six allegations consisting of five debts totaling 
$11,076, and a 2012 home foreclosure. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f)  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to a series of events surrounding a 
contentious 2009 divorce. Applicant realized that he could not maintain two households, 
honor the irresponsible financial obligations incurred by his estranged wife, and support 
his children on his then salary. He immediately contacted his mortgage lender seeking a 
loan modification and despite his repeated attempts, his lender was unwilling to work 
with him. Applicant lost his home to foreclosure that occurred at the peak of the housing 
market downturn. There is no remaining mortgage arrearage or deficiency. (Items 1, 3, 
5, 6; FORM response) 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as FORM response.  
 
2
 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In his FORM, Department Counsel noted that absent mitigating documentation, it 
was not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant apparently took note of Department Counsel’s comments and in 
his FORM response provided sufficient mitigating documentation.  Of particular concern 
was a $10,564 collection account. The remaining four debts were all less than $150 
each.  
 
Applicant has paid in full the two collection accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b for 
$112 and $150, respectively. He has settled and paid the $10,564 collection account in 
SOR ¶ 1.e for the lesser amount of $8,215. Applicant provided sufficient evidence that 
he attempted to resolve or dispute the two remaining collection accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.d for $150 and $100, respectively. These debts no longer appear on his credit 
report. Applicant is current on his monthly expenses. (FORM response)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
 
The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his 
behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement.   
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant was involved in a costly and 
contentious divorce and he suddenly found himself responsible for bills incurred by his 
former wife as well as the sole custodian for his children. Additionally, Applicant could 
not have anticipated the downturn in the housing market. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and 20(d) is fully applicable. Although 
Applicant did not receive formal financial counseling, his debts are resolved or being 
resolved and there are clear indications that his financial problems are under control. As 
noted above, Applicant has made a concerted effort to repay his creditors. He has paid 
or settled three of the five debts and attempted to settle or dispute two small debts that 
no longer appear on his credit report. Given Applicant’s resources and situation at the 
time, he approached his debts in a responsible and measured way.3 AG ¶ 20(e) is 
                                                          
3
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicable to the two $150 and $100 collection accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. 
As noted, these debt no longer appear on Applicant’s credit report. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s past military service and employment with a 
defense contractor weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a 
productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his 
means, and his SOR debts are resolved. Applicant understands what he needs to do to 
maintain his financial responsibility.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
