                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  15-03404           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On March 24, 2016, Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 26, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on April 12 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on October
26, 2016. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-6).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits.  The transcript (Tr.) was
received on November 4, 2016.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented satisfaction of the
creditor 1.b judgment. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to
supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three days to respond.
Applicant did not supplement the record with any documented evidence.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to file his federal income tax
returns for tax years 2008 through 2011; (b) incurred an adverse consumer judgment in
2010 for $5,223; (c) accumulated four delinquent consumer and medical debts exceeding
$500; and (d) accrued $1,585 in delinquent mortgage payments.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted his failure to file federal tax returns
for tax years 2008-2011, as required. He claimed his federal tax filings are current. He
denied the allegations in SOR ¶ ¶ 1.c-1.g, claiming the debts were either paid or brought
current.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old electrician for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in May 1998 and has one son from this marriage.  (GE 1) He
attended on-line education classes between February 2009 and March 2013 and earned
a certificate in basic hypnosis in December 21, 2016. He claimed no military service.
(GEs 1, 6) Applicant has worked for his current employer since November 2001. (GE 1)
Previously, he was president of his own company. (GEs 1, 6) 
Applicant’s finances
Applicant failed to file his federal tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2011.(GEs
2-6) He provided no documentation of his filing his federal tax returns for these back
years during the intervening years, or since the hearing was conducted (GEs 2-6; Tr. 19-
20); even though he assured the agent in his interview with an investigator from the Office
3
of Personnel Management (OPM) in May 2013 that he would file his back tax returns for
tax years 2008-2011. (GE 6)  
Applicant attributed his failures to file his 2008-2011 federal tax returns to (a) his
belief that he did not owe any taxes for those years and (b) he was too busy with other
matters. (Tr. 20-23) He explained that he has never had a tax year between 2008 and
2011 when he owed any federal taxes and never received any tax notices from the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) before or since 2011. (Tr. 21-22) Afforded opportunities at
both his hearing and after the hearing to supplement the record, Applicant provided no
documentation of his filing federal tax returns for tax years 2008-2011. (Tr. 24-28)
In 2010, he incurred an adverse judgment in the amount of $5,223 from creditor
1.b. Applicant provided no documentation of his satisfying this judgment during the
hearing or in the time permitted to supplement the record. (Tr. 19-20) This judgment debt
remains outstanding. (GEs 2-6; Tr. 25-27) 
Besides the adverse judgment debt, Applicant accumulated a number of
delinquent consumer debts with the following creditors: creditors 1.c ($31); creditor 1.d
($207); creditor 1.e ($135); creditor 1.f ($217); and creditor 1.g ($1,585). Applicant
provided no documentation of his addressing these debts with payoffs, payment plans, or
good-faith disputes. GEs 2-6; Tr. 28-34) Applicant’s SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.g remain unsatisfied
and unaddressed in any verifiable way. Applicant did not provide any character
references or evidence of community and civic contributions to be considered along with
evidence of his mismanaging his finances.
                     Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
4
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
5
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of failing to file federal tax
returns for tax years 2008 through 2011; his incurring an adverse judgment in 2010
against him; and his accumulation of other delinquent debts. To date, Applicant has
failed to provide any documentary proof of his filing his back tax returns for the years in
issue.
Applicant’s tax-filing lapses, accumulated adverse judgment, and delinquent
consumer and medical debts in issue warrant the application of three of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts,” DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and DC ¶ 19(g),
“failure to file Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent
filing of the same.” 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s tax-filing problems and accumulation of delinquent debts, inclusive of
one judgment, merit no application of any of the mitigating conditions. He provided no
proof of extenuating circumstances associated with his failure to file federal income tax
return for tax years 2008-2011, or his accruing an adverse judgment and other
consumer debts between 2006 and 2013.
Without more documented information about his tax filing lapses and delinquent
debts and corrective steps he has taken to mitigate the Government’s financial
concerns, Applicant cannot demonstrate the level of financial progress required to meet
the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to
rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts considering his
6
circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009).
Applicant’s lack of documented federal tax filings for tax years 2008-2011 and
repayment actions of his own with the resources available to him prevent him from
meeting the Appeal Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR
Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000));
ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant has provided no evidence of
demonstrated efforts to date to address and resolve his tax filing lapses and debt
delinquency problems and provided no evidence of endorsements and community and
civic contributions.  Based on the information provided, a whole-person assessment of
Applicant’s overall trustworthiness can take into consideration his work experience and
his administering to tax filings and debts. More substantial than the credit he is entitled
to as experienced electrician are the judgment elapses he exhibited in his handling of
his finances.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s tax filing lapses and
payment delinquencies (including the creditor 1.b judgment), Applicant’s actions to date
in addressing his finances are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by
the guideline governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g. of Guideline F. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.g:                      Against Applicant
Conclusions                                 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
7
                                        
  
8
