Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-6.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 15-03555 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 12 November 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 16 April 2016, when Applicant’s response to the FORM was due. Applicant
provided no additional documents. DOHA assigned the case to me 16 December 2016.
The automobile was one he purchased for one of his daughters. She was in an accident and the automobile3
was a total loss. Applicant has not explained how, under these circumstances, he is not responsible for the
deficiency balance.
The June 2013 credit report was a consolidated report, with entries by the three main credit bureaus. The4
March 2015 credit report contained entries from only one of the bureaus. W hoever drafted the SOR included
only the delinquent debts from the March 2015 credit report. I have not considered the unalleged delinquent
debts from the June 2013 credit report on the merits of the case.
His June 2013 subject interview records his cohabitant’s unemployment (otherwise not dated), but makes5
no mention of his child’s medical issue.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 48-year-old principal
software engineer employed by a U.S. defense contractor since August 2008. He has
been continuously employed as a software engineer since February 1991. His
clearance status is unclear. Applicant served on reserve duty in the U.S. military from
August 1986 to April 1990, and received an honorable discharge. He is the never-
married father of five children: one adult and one near-adult with two different women,
and three minor children with his cohabitant.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (Items 3-6) substantiate, and Applicant
admits eight delinquent debts totaling over $37,000. Over $35,000 of the debt is for
past-due amounts on his first (SOR 1.c) and second (SOR 1.a) mortgages and a
deficiency on a voluntary automobile repossession. The remaining balances are for a
charged-off consumer account (SOR 1.d) and for four delinquent medical accounts
(SOR 1.e-1.h). Applicant documented no contacts with his creditors, and provided no
evidence of their current status, although his March 2015 credit report (Item 5) reflects
that his mortgage (SOR 1.c) is now current, having been modified.
Applicant reported some financial problems on his May 2013 clearance
application (Item 3). Of the SOR allegations, only his delinquent second mortgage and
the deficiency on his voluntary automobile repossession were reported.  However,3
during his June 2013 interview with a Government investigator (Item 4), he discussed
the delinquent debts listed in his June 2013 credit report (Item 6), including all the SOR
allegations except SOR 1.e and 1.h.  Applicant told the investigator that he would4
follow-up on all the delinquent debts and resolve them.
Applicant attributes his financial problems generally to his cohabitant’s
unemployment and medical issues for one of his children, which he puts at an
unspecified time beginning three years ago (Answer).  However, he provided no5
chronology to demonstrate how these events affected his finances. He has not
documented any contact with his creditors since completing his clearance application in
May 2013 and discussing his personal situation with the Government investigator in
June 2013. He has stated no plan for addressing his delinquent debts. He provided no
budget or financial statement. Applicant has not received any credit counseling or debt
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
¶19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;7
3
consolidation. He provided no work or character references, or any evidence of
community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.6
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has a history of financial
difficulties, which are ongoing.  Applicant provided no chronology to measure the onset7
of his financial problems. Nevertheless, despite steady employment since February
1991, there is no evidence of any efforts by Applicant to resolve the SOR debts, except
for his first mortgage, which he had modified.
Applicant meets none of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations.
His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple; and Applicant provided no
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that8
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and9
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications10
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.11
4
evidence to show that the immediate causes of his problems have been resolved.  The8
loss of his cohabitant’s income and his child’s illness could constitute circumstances
beyond his control if adequately placed in a chronology, but without a more detailed
chronology, he cannot demonstrate that he has been responsible in addressing his
debts, particularly where he has documented no contact with any of his creditors except
his first mortgage holder.9
 
Applicant submitted no evidence to show that he received credit or financial
counseling, and his debts are clearly not being resolved.  There are no signs that10
Applicant has been in contact with any of the creditors alleged in the SOR, except for
the first mortgage holde, and thus he cannot establish that he has made a good-faith
effort to address his debts.  Moreover, Applicant has mostly disregarded these financial11
obligations since his subject interview in June 2013. His documented inaction for over
three years raises significant security concerns that Applicant has not begun to address.
Accordingly, I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs a-b, d-h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
