                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------                   )     ISCR Case No. 15-00013
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
 
History of the Case
On August 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865
(E.O. 10865), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 8, 2015, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 11, 2016 and responded to the FORM
with a post-FORM submission documenting her bringing her SOR ¶ 1.a past due
mortgage account current with a payment of $48,637. Applicant’s submission was
admitted without objection as Item 9. The case was assigned to me on September 12,
2016.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four delinquent debts
exceeding $38,000. Allegedly, each of the listed delinquent debts remains outstanding. 
In her response, Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR, with
explanations. She claimed to have paid off the district tax liens entered against her, one
for $2,987 and the other for $458, in connection with one of her rental properties. She
provided explanations of how she incurred the delinquent debt on the mortgage
account on one of her seven mortgages on homes located in her area.  Further, she
explained the steps she is taking to bring her mortgage account current on the rental
property in delinquent status. 
Background
Applicant is a 52-year-old part-time senior principal for a defense contractor  who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Applicant married in 2002 and has three children from this marriage, including
two stepchildren. (Item 4) She earned a bachelor’s degree in December 1986. (Item 4)
She has no prior military service.  
Applicant has worked for her current employer as a business principal since
2012. (Item 4) Between November 2010 and June 2011, she worked as a business
strategist for a non-defense contractor. (Item 4) Applicant worked for different
consulting groups between January 1994 and January 2009. And from April 1991 to
September 1992, she worked in community relations as an expert consultant for the
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). (Item 4) She held a Government security clearance
in previous years as a consultant, dating to 1986 or 1987. (Item 8) 
Finances
Applicant owns a number of rental properties (six in all) in addition to her
residence. (Items 3 and 8) She has mortgages on each of these homes, including two
with the same lender that is covered in SOR ¶ 1.a.
In early 2010, Applicant and her husband became primary care-givers in their
home for her mother-in-law who was diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer’s disease.
3
Unprepared for dealing with her mother-in-law’s disease, Applicant paid much less
attention on financial planning, home repairs, mail, her friends, her personal health, and
even her marriage. (Item 3 and Items 8) Balancing her mother-in-law’s illness with the
management of her properties, her home, and her family contributed to significant
stress in her life. Her mother-in-law passed away in 2012. (Item 3 and Item 8)
Several months after her mother-in-law’s death, Applicant’s husband began
having numbness in his lower body and could no longer work or manage their
properties. (Item 3 and Item 8) Two years after his undergoing emergency spinal
surgery, her husband’s motor function has returned, and he shows improvement from
his depression and psychological impact of near-paralysis. 
While dealing with the health issues of her mother-in-law and husband, Applicant
failed to properly monitor her properties and incurred delinquencies on the mortgage of
one of her rental properties she purchased in 1990. (Item 3 and Items 5-8) Previously,
she had never been late in her payments on this mortgage. Her most recent credit
reports reveal a past due balance of $34,784 on a loan balance of $246,957. (Item 5) In
her post-FORM response, Applicant documented her bringing this mortgage account
current with a $48,637 payment in February 2016. (Item 9) 
Besides her mortgage debt, Applicant incurred two tax liens against her in March
2011: one for $2,987 and another for $458. (Items 5-8) Her district’s taxing authority
issued the tax lien covered by ¶ 1.b in March 2011 for unpaid income taxes for 2007.
(Item 3 and Items, 5-8) The taxing authority acknowledged its filing error and released
its tax lien in March 2011 (Item 3) 
The tax lien covered by ¶ 1.c concerned a reportedly delinquent tenant water bill.
(Item 3 and Items 5-8) After Applicant made the district aware of the mistaken lien in
March 2011, the district released the lien and issued a certificate of clean hands in
October 2015. (Items 3 and 5-8) The only other listed delinquent debt in the SOR is a
$127 medical debt covered by ¶ 1.d (Item 3 and Items 5-8) She assured she is making
concerted efforts to resolve this debt. (Item 3)
Applicant provided no character references on her behalf, either with her answer
or with her response to the FORM.  Nor did she furnish any performance evaluations or
evidence of community and civic contributions. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
4
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
5
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  E.O. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a part-time senior principal for a defense contractor who
accumulated four delinquent debts during periods of added stress while caring for her
ill mother-in-law and husband for several years. The debts are comprised of a
$34,784 mortgage debt on one of her rental properties, two tax liens, and a small
medical debt. Applicant’s accumulation of the four listed delinquent debts warrant the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulation of
unaddressed delinquent debts covered in the SOR negate the need for any
independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of
Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in her credit reports.  See ISCR Case
03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
                                         
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
6
Extenuating circumstances can be inferred from Applicant’s persistent
difficulties in caring for her mother-in-law before her passing in 2012, and with her
husband’s physical disabilities associated with his legs and lower back over a two
year period spanning 2012-2014. Considering the available documented evidence,
extenuating circumstances in this record account for some of Applicant’s debt
problems in connection with her past-due mortgage on her rental property, tax liens,
and medical debt. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly.” 
Applicant’s listed delinquent debts are mostly attributable to her lack of close
attention to the management of her properties over the course of several years while
attending to her disabled mother-in-law and husband. She is doing much better now
in handling her family-related stress conditions and has documented her bringing her
mortgage account current on the one rental property in issue with a reported
delinquent mortgage. 
Applicant also documented her resolving the two district tax liens filed against
her. Both of these liens were released in March 2011. Only the $127 medical debt of
record remains to be resolved on this medical debt, and Applicant continues to work
on resolving this debt.  MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” fully applies to Applicant’s situation. 
Whole-person assessment enables Applicant to surmount raised judgment
questions implicit in her accumulation of delinquent mortgage, tax, and medical debts.
Based on the information provided by Applicant, the evidence of record is enough to
permit Applicant to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security
concerns associated with her accrual of delinquent debts. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s accrual of mortgage, tax, and medical debts, and her subsequent
resolution of all but the small medical debt, Applicant’s debt resolution efforts are
sufficient to facilitate safe conclusions that her finances are sufficiently stabilized to
permit her access to classified information. Allegations covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.d of Guideline F are resolved favorably for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):  FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs. 1.a through 1.d:      For Applicant
7
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
