1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  15-02021 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 1, 2012. On 
October 23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 11, 2015,1 and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on January 29, 2016. On February 2, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
                                                          
1 Applicant included nine attachments with her SOR answer, which I have marked as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) 1 through 9.  
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She 
received the FORM on February 8, 2016, and submitted her response on March 1, 2016, 
to which the Government did not object.2 The case was assigned to me on December 12, 
2016. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 35 years old and has been married since 2006. She and her husband 
have one child, age 4. She received a bachelor’s degree in May 2005. She is a senior 
electrical engineer, employed full time by a federal contractor since June 2005.  
 
Applicant and her husband purchased a home for their primary residence in March 
2007 for $299,900. They financed the entire purchase price of the home, with a first-
mortgage loan of $239,000 and a second-mortgage loan of $59,900. In August 2011, 
after they realized that the combined balances of these two mortgage loans were 
significantly higher than the fair market value of their home (i.e. “underwater”) due to the 
housing market crash, she and her husband decided to stop making payments on their 
mortgage loans (i.e. “strategically default”).4 Based on information obtained from home-
estimate websites, they believed that the value of their home had decreased to 
approximately $150,000. Applicant and her husband also believed that they would never 
recover the loss in value before the balloon payment on their second-mortgage loan 
became due in 2022. In June 2012, she and her husband vacated the home. The first-
mortgage lender foreclosed on the home in July 2012, and the trustee sold it at public 
auction that same month for approximately $189,000.   
 
Applicant further asserts that she and her husband stopped paying their mortgage 
loans because they feared the possibility that one or both of them could be laid off, and 
because she was pregnant. Initially, they were concerned about the increased expenses 
associated with raising a healthy child (including childcare) and her reduced maternity-
leave income. However, when tests suggested that their child could be born with special 
needs, they were also worried about the possibility of extraordinary medical expenses 
and decreased income due to the need for Applicant to stay home full time. Fortunately, 
neither Applicant nor or her husband were laid off nor was their child born with special 
needs. However, she and her husband believed then, and still believe now, that 
“strategically defaulting” on their mortgage loans was necessary to ensure the well-being 
of their financial future; and was a better and more proactive approach to the alternative 
                                                          
2 Applicant included four attachments with her FORM response, which I have marked as AX 10 through 13. 
 
3 I have extracted these facts from Applicant’s FORM response, SOR answer (Item 2), security clearance 
application (Item 3), and the summary of her background investigation interview (Item 5) unless otherwise 
indicated by a parenthetical citation to another item in the record. I considered that the summary of the in-
person interview conducted during Applicant’s background investigation (Item 5) was not authenticated as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. However, Department Counsel informed Applicant that she was entitled to 
make corrections, additions, deletions, and updates to Item 5. Applicant was also informed that she was 
entitled to object to consideration of Item 5 on the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant did neither 
in her response to the FORM. 
  
4 They did, however, continue to pay their homeowner’s association dues through July 2012. 
3 
 
option of waiting for an actual financial crisis to occur. They also reduced expenses by 
renting a less expensive home and purchasing a less expensive vehicle.   
 
Applicant and her husband did not attempt a loan refinance, in part, because the 
second-mortgage loan was not eligible and, therefore, the balloon payment issue would 
remain unresolved; and, in part, because they believed that they could not qualify based 
on the value of their home and their income. They also did not attempt a loan modification 
because they believed that they could not qualify. They did attempt to short sell the home, 
but the lender refused to accept the offers. While Applicant does not provide the basis for 
the refusal, she explained that it was common practice at the time for lenders not to accept 
a short sale offer without additional cash from the borrower. Applicant provided copies of 
three offers, one dated July 14, 2012, and two dated July 15, 2012, but offered no 
evidence of any prior efforts to short sell the home. At some point,5 Applicant sought the 
advice of a real estate attorney. This attorney advised them about tax breaks that could 
apply to relieve them of the expected large tax burden associated with a foreclosure or 
short sale of their home, but warned that he expected them to expire at the end of 2012. 
This attorney also advised them about a “buy and bail” approach that they were not 
comfortable pursuing. Applicant did not state whether this attorney also advised them 
about refinancing and modifications. Instead, Applicant explains that she and her 
husband based those decisions on their “understandings” of the various programs and 
rules. Beyond the last-minute short sale attempts, Applicant did not present evidence that 
either she or her husband otherwise had communications with their mortgage lenders at 
the various stages in the process to attempt to resolve their mortgage loan delinquencies 
(either before or after they chose to stop making their mortgage loan payments, the 
foreclosure, or the trustee’s sale). 
 
Applicant’s first-mortgage loan account was charged off after foreclosure (SOR 
¶1.a). The charge-off amount of $226,337 reflected in the credit reports6 is incorrect in 
light of the record evidence. The first-mortgage loan balance at the time of foreclosure 
was $242,936 and the home was sold at the trustee’s sale for approximately $189,000.  
The resulting deficiency balance is $53,936, which is the amount that would have been 
charged off by the lender. Her second-mortgage loan account was charged off after 
foreclosure in the approximate amount of $53,464 (SOR ¶1.b).7 In her SOR answer, 
Applicant denied owing either amount. Applicant claims that her state’s anti-deficiency 
statute prohibits her lender from collecting any deficiency balance on her first-mortgage 
loan. (AX 2 and AX 3.) Applicant’s first-mortgage lender has never pursued collecting the 
deficiency balance. Applicant provided contradictory evidence of the status of her second-
mortgage loan: a deed of release showing the loan as “paid in full” as of September 2015 
(AX 5); and an account statement showing a $53,464 balance due as of March 2016 (AX 
                                                          
5 Applicant did not state whether she sought this advice before or after they stopped making their mortgage 
loan payments. 
 
6 Item 7 at #20. See also AX6 at p. 2, AX7 at p. 17, AX 8 at pp. 3-4 and 24-25.  
 
7 Item 7 at #21. See also AX 8 at pp. 25-26 and AX 11. I considered that this debt does not appear in AX 6 
and appears in AX 7 at p. 17 as paid. I also considered the Deed of Release that reflects this debt as “paid 
in full” (AX 5). 
 
4 
 
11). Applicant was “in the process” of disputing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
in March 2016. 
 
As of March 2016, Applicant and her husband earned a combined annual salary 
of approximately $180,000, and maintained savings of about $8,400 (AX 13) and 
retirement assets of about $394,000 (AX 13).8 There is no information in the record about 
their income, assets, or expenses from the years 2011 or 2012. Sometime between 
November 2015 and March 2016, Applicant and her husband purchased a new home 
with a down payment of $13,000 and paid off the debt related to a vehicle that they had 
purchased in January 2015 for $29,200.9   
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling, but her most recent credit reports 
reveal no new delinquent debt (AX 6, AX 7, AX 8). Applicant currently lives within her 
means and manages her current finances responsibly. Applicant’s direct supervisor 
describes her work as “exemplary” and avers that she “conducts herself with dignity, 
truthfulness and honesty.” (AX 9.) Applicant has maintained a security clearance for over 
10 years without incident. She contends that the facts of her case are analogous to those 
set forth in a colleague’s December 2014 DOHA security clearance decision and that, 
therefore, I should find in her favor (AX 10). 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
8 Applicant and her husband also have maintained a college fund for their child for an unspecified duration 
and of an unspecified amount. 
 
9 I obtained the purchase date and price from AX 6 at pp. 15-16, AX 7 at p. 22, and AX 8 at p. 5. 
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR ¶. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security clearance.” ISCR Case 
No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds . . . .  
 
 
6 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports establish two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”) based on a first-mortgage debt (SOR ¶1.a) 
and a second-mortgage debt (SOR ¶ 1.b).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial 
problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss 
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. While Applicant is no longer liable for her delinquent 
mortgage loan debts, the circumstances under which the debts occurred cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, as more fully 
discussed below.10   
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established.  There are no facts in the record that Applicant 
stopped paying her mortgage loans due to circumstances that were largely beyond her 
control. I considered that the housing market crash caused her mortgage loans to be 
underwater as of August 2011.  However, there is no evidence that Applicant or her 
husband’s actual income or expenses prevented them from paying their mortgage loans 
                                                          
10 Even if an applicant has actually paid his debts, a Judge may still consider the circumstances underlying 
the debts for what they may reveal about the applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. See ISCR Case No. 15-
00216 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2016). 
 
7 
 
after August 2011. Applicant admits that their decision to stop paying the mortgage loans 
stemmed from fears of potential changes in income and expenses that never actually 
materialized.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. Applicant has not received financial counseling. 
Although she never actually paid her delinquent mortgage debt, it has been resolved; and 
Applicant has otherwise maintained her finances responsibly. 
 
Her state’s anti-deficiency statute applies to alleviate Applicant’s liability for the 
deficiency balance of her first-mortgage loan. Furthermore, Applicant’s lender filed a deed 
of release disclosing that her second-mortgage loan was paid in full.11  
 
The following are the relevant portions of her state’s anti-deficiency statute:12  
 
A. Except as provided in subsections F, G and H of this 
section, within within ninety days after the date of sale of trust 
property .  .  . , an action may be maintained to recover a 
deficiency judgment against any person directly, indirectly or 
contingently liable on the contract for which the trust deed was 
given as security including any guarantor of or surety for the 
contract and any partner of a trustor or other obligor which is 
a partnership. In any such action against such a person, the 
deficiency judgment shall be for an amount equal to the sum 
of the total amount owed the beneficiary as of the date of the 
sale, as determined by the court less the fair market value of 
the trust property on the date of the sale as determined by the 
court or the sale price at the trustee's sale, whichever is 
higher.  .  .  . 
 
D. If no action is maintained for a deficiency judgment within 
the time period prescribed in subsection[] A . . . of this section, 
the proceeds of the sale, regardless of amount, shall be 
deemed to be in full satisfaction of the obligation and no right 
to recover a deficiency in any action shall exist.  
 
G. If trust property of two and one-half acres or less which is 
limited to and utilized for either a single one-family or a single 
two-family dwelling is sold pursuant to the trustee's power of 
sale, no action may be maintained to recover any difference 
between the amount obtained by sale and the amount of the 
indebtedness and any interest, costs and expenses.”  
 
Given the plain language of this statute, one could arguably find Applicant not liable 
for the deficiency balance of her first-mortgage loan under two bases.  First, pursuant to 
                                                          
11 I accorded more evidentiary weight to the recorded deed of release than to the account statement.  
 
12 AX 2 
8 
 
subsection G, she would not be liable if her home is deemed a single one-family dwelling 
of two and one-half acres or less. Second, pursuant to subsection D, she would not be 
liable if her lender failed to timely pursue an action for a deficiency judgment.  While 
Applicant’s home was a single one-family dwelling, there are no record facts about the 
acreage of the home so I cannot find that subsection G applies.  However, because the 
lender has not pursued an action for a deficiency judgement since the July 2012 trustee’s 
sale, I find that subsection D applies.   
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. I credit Applicant for continuing to pay her 
homeowner’s association fees until the trustee’s sale, for seeking a real estate attorney’s 
advice, and for attempting to short sell her home (albeit at the last minute). However, she 
did not otherwise put forth a good-faith effort to honor the terms of her mortgage loan 
once she decided that doing so would not be in her family’s best financial interest. While 
Applicant may have contemplated less self-serving reasons than initially reported to justify 
her “strategic default,” at the heart of her decision-making was a choice to protect her 
self-interest above her legal obligations.  Although, legally, she is no longer responsible 
for the monetary consequences of that decision, there remains a concern with respect to 
her security worthiness.  As an individual seeking to obtain the benefit of a privilege and 
not a right, she is held to a higher standard for actions that might otherwise be considered 
innocuous. Applicant’s decision to “strategically default” on her mortgage loans 
demonstrates a willingness to place her own self-interest above her obligations. I am, 
therefore, left with doubt as to whether she may also act similarly in the context of her 
security obligations.  
 
Further regarding the issue of good-faith effort, I want to address Applicant’s 
contention that her case is analogous to that of my colleague’s December 2014 decision. 
It is not. Moreover, even if it were, the decision is not a binding precedent that would 
require me to find in Applicant’s favor.13  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
13 Although Hearing Office decisions may be cited as persuasive authority, they are not binding legal 
precedent which must follow in another situation. See ISCR Case No. 09-08248 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 22, 
2011). 
 
9 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors listed above. Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate her 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her financial indebtedness. 
Accordingly, I conclude that she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR ¶: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
