 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06242 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 25, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 16, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 26, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on June 13, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 15, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for July 13, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 and 2, which were admitted after 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left open until August 12, 2016, for 
receipt of additional documentation. Applicant presented documents, which I marked 
 
2 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and B. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR.) 
on July 21, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to all the subparagraphs of the SOR. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since 2015. (GX 1 at pages 5 and 13.) He is 
married to a native born American citizen, and they have two children, the youngest is 
“one and a half years old,” and the oldest “three and a half years old.”  (TR at page 21 
line 5 to page 22 line 4, and GX 1 at page 19.) 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
 1.a.  Applicant was born in France, but immigrated to the United States in 
January of 2000.  (TR at page 17 line 21 to page 20 line 4.)  He became a U.S. citizen 
in September of 2012.  (GX 1 at page 7.)   Although he initially retained his French 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen, he only used his U.S. passport when traveling 
outside the United States.  (TR at page 39 lines 1~10.)   In 2015, he renewed his 
French passport in hope of obtaining dual nationality for his two children.  (TR at page 
39 line 11 to page 43 line 21.)  In August of 2016, however, he surrendered his French 
passport to his Facility Security Officer (FSO), as evidenced by a letter from his FSO.  
(AppX A.) 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 2.a. and 2.b.  Applicant’s 78-year-old father and 74-year-old mother are citizens 
and residents of France.  (TR at page 23 line 2 to page 27 line 10.)  They are both 
retired university professors.  (TR at page 25 line 4 to page 26 line 4.)  They both 
receive a pension from the French government, and Applicant provides no financial 
support to his parents.  (TR at page 26 lines 5~9, and at page 27 lines 6~10.)  Applicant 
contacts his parents every “two to three weeks.”   (TR at page 26 lines 13~23.) 
 
 2.c.  Applicant’s twin sisters are citizens of France.  One, who also lives in 
France, is a  hospital secretary.  (TR at page 28 lines 5~14.)  She has no connection 
with the French government, and Applicant does not provide her any financial support.  
(Id.)  He contacts this sister “every two to three weeks.”  (TR at page 29 lines 5~8.) 
 
 Applicant’s other sister “works for an oil company in Norway.”  (TR at page 29 
lines 13~17.)  She has no connection with the French government, but he is unsure if 
she has any connection with the Norwegian government through the oil industry.  (TR at 
page 30 lines 10~21.)  He does not provide her any financial support.  (TR at page 30 
lines 22~24.)  He contacts this sister “every month and a half, two months.”  (TR at page 
30 lines 1~4.) 
 
3 
 
 2.d.  Applicant has about $75,000 in a bank account in France.  (TR at page 30 
line 25 to page 31 line 18.)  His mother gave this “donation” to Applicant prior to his 
immigration to the United States.  (TR at page 31 line 19 to page 32 line16.)  He plans 
to transfer these monies to a U.S. bank account.  (TR at page 32 lines 7~16.)  Applicant 
will also receive about $95,000, as an inheritance, as the result of his deceased 
grandmother’s property, pending sale.  (TR at page 32 line 20 to page 33 line 12, and at 
page 33 line 20 to page 434 line 10.)  He has no “other property interest in France,” as 
alleged.  (TR at page 33 lines 13~23.) 
 
 In the United States, Applicant has $80,000 of equity in his $500,000 home, and 
he and his wife have a combined annual income of about $200,000.  (TR at page 36 
lines 1~23.)  He also has about $10,000 in savings, and about $50,000 in a retirement 
account, both in the United States.  (TR at page 36 line 24 to page 37 line 12.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant’s parents and one sibling are citizens and residents of France.  The 
other French national sibling lives in Norway.  He also has a French bank account, and 
a French inheritance that is in probate. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions, although no evidence was presented that would support any 
 
5 
 
finding that conditions in France, or its relationship to the United States, would create a 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8 (a), 8(b), and 8 (c) apply.  Applicant’s American born wife and children 
live with him in the United States.  His contact with his French family is typical of that of 
a son and sibling, but clearly does not outweigh his affection for his immediate U.S. 
family.  His foreign relatives, apart from his parents’ pensions, have little or no 
connection with a foreign government.  As to his potential net worth in France, it pales in 
comparison to his net worth in the United States, and he fully intends to transfer his 
foreign financial interests to the United States. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
 
6 
 
  Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and France. He exercised his  
French citizenship when he renewed the French passport, despite that fact that he was 
a United States citizen at that time and had a U.S. passport. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant surrendered his French passport to his facility security officer. It is no 
longer in his possession. The Department of Defense will be notified if and when the 
passport is returned to Applicant. AG ¶ 11(e) provides mitigation with respect to this 
guideline. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is well respected by his direct 
supervisor, who avers that Applicant is trustworthy and should be granted a security 
clearance.  (AppX B.) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.b.:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.c.:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.d.:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
