KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal
Board.  The whole-person analysis included consideration of the entirety of the record.  Adverse
decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 15-06481.a1
DATE: 01/19/2017
DATE: January 19, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06481
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 27, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
November 8, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
31 years old, Applicant is married with two children.  He works for a Defense contractor. 
He has a history of using marijuana and cocaine.  He began using marijuana in high school and
continued until April 2014.  Convinced that he had become addicted to marijuana, Applicant sought
one-on-one counseling, which he successfully completed.  He also used cocaine from 2005 until
2010 on about five separate occasions.  He used marijuana and cocaine (at least once) while working
for his current employer and holding a clearance.
Applicant has been clean and sober since April 2014.  He is an active member of his church. 
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for reliability, trustworthiness, and responsibility. 
Applicant continued counseling after having completed his one-on-one program.  His counselor
states that he can be trusted with matters of security.  Applicant’s job appraisals show that he meets
requirements in each category.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant had used marijuana until two years prior to the Decision. 
She stated that his use of drugs while holding a clearance was troubling.  Applicant knew that his
conduct was in contravention of the law, as well as of DoD policy and the policy of his employer. 
She stated that his drug use was still recent.  Although she commended Applicant for his counseling,
she concluded that more time is required to mitigate concerns arising from extensive drug use over
a ten-year period.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to favorable evidence, such as his character references, the opinion of his
counselor, his statement of intent not to use drugs in the future, etc.  Applicant has not rebutted the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-02854 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2016).   Neither has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence
in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06686
at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016).  Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he had only been sober
for 24 months.  We find this argument persuasive, in that more time than that had elapsed between
Applicant’s last use of marijuana in April 2014 and the close of the record in late 2016.  However,
given the extent of Applicant’s drug use, his admission that he was addicted to marijuana, and his
use of marijuana and cocaine while holding a clearance, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had
not been abstinent long enough to show true rehabilitation is sustainable.  
Applicant cites to some Hearing Office cases that be believes support his effort to obtain a
favorable decision.  We give these cases due consideration as persuasive authority.  However,
2
Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-04096 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2016).   Contrary to Applicant’s argument,
the Judge’s whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of Directive ¶ 6.3, in that the
Judge considered the totality of the evidence in reaching her decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
05762 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2016). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
