1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00816
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred approximately $31,000 of delinquent debt. More than 80
percent of this debt is comprised of student loans that, through his efforts at
rehabilitation, are no longer in delinquent status. He has made substantive progress in
satisfying his other debts. Under these circumstances, I conclude Applicant has
mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Clearance is granted.
 Statement of the Case
On September 27, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006. 
2
 
Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response, admitting all of the
allegations and requesting a hearing. The hearing was held as scheduled. I received
five government exhibits (GE 1 - 5), 11 Applicant exhibits (AE A - AE K), and I
considered Applicant’s testimony. At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at
Applicant’s request, to allow him the opportunity to submit additional exhibits. Within the
time allotted, he submitted two additional exhibits that I admitted and incorporated into
the record as AE L and AE M. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 31, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old single man. He is a high school graduate and has
earned three years of college credits. For the past two years, he has worked for a
defense contractor as an administrative assistant. (Tr. 27) His principal duties include
organizing meetings. Applicant is highly respected on the job. (AE E - AE J)
 
Applicant attended college every semester between 2007 and 2010. (Tr. 32)
Unable to afford tuition, he dropped out at the end of his junior year with the intention of
getting a job, saving money, then re-enrolling. (Tr. 33, 46) Over the next three years,
Applicant worked at various restaurants, but  was ultimately unable to make ends meet,
as his work hours were erratic. (Tr. 36)  
In 2013, Applicant left the area where he had been working, moved back in with
his mother, and began working for the employer who his sponsoring his security
clearance application. (Tr. 36) By then, he had incurred $31,000 of delinquent debt,
including a $2,681 rent payment from his last residence where he lived before returning
home (SOR subparagraph 1.a), $25,000 of student loans (SOR subparagraphs 1.b -
1.g), and $2,500 of miscellaneous debts (SOR subparagraphs 1.h - 1.j).
Applicant fell behind on his rent, as alleged in subparagraph 1.a, after business
slowed down at the restaurant where he was working, leading to reduced hours and
reduced pay. (Tr. 20) He contacted the landlord to negotiate a payment plan, but could
not agree on a down payment. (Tr. 37) He is still attempting to negotiate a resolution of
this debt. (Tr. 37)
In April 2015, Applicant contacted what he thought was a reputable student loan
consolidation company to help him address his delinquent student loans. After making
$600 of payments over the next three months, but receiving no confirmation from the
student loan creditors that they were receiving any of the money, Applicant researched
the consolidation company and discovered that it was fraudulent. (AE D; Tr. 47) Since
then, Applicant has contacted a reputable student loan company and entered into a
payment plan. (AE K) Under the plan, he is to pay five dollars per month for nine
months to rehabilitate the loan. (AE K at 9) Then, the debt will be assigned to another
creditor. (AE K; Tr. 48) Applicant made the first payment in September 2016, as agreed.
SOR subparagraph 1.h is a credit card debt for $1,542. Applicant fell behind on
these credit card payments during the period when he was waiting tables and his work
3
 
hours were reduced. (Tr. 23) He began satisfying this debt in January 2015 through
$140 monthly payments. (AE B) By January 2016, he had satisfied it entirely. (AE M)
SOR subparagraph 1.i., totaling $691, is a phone bill. This is Applicant’s current
phone service provider, and he claims his bill payments are current. (Tr. 23) He
provided no evidence corroborating this contention.
Applicant was unable to identify the bill alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.j, totalling
$290. His efforts at contacting the creditor by phone, and later, online, were
unsuccessful. (Tr. 24)
Currently, Applicant is not working for his employer, pending the outcome of his
security clearance application. He is working for a car dealership earning approximately
$1,000 per month. He is living with his mother, and he pays her approximately $500
each month. (Tr. 44) Applicant has minimal discretionary income. (Tr. 44)  
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of AG ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.” Applicant satisfied the debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.h in its
entirety. I resolve it in his favor.
4
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debt.
Most of Applicant’s debt is for money he borrowed to help him improve his
employment prospects through a college education. He did not fall behind on them until
2010 when his work hours were cut, leading to a reduction in pay. He has negotiated a
payment plan to rehabilitate his student loans, satisfied SOR subparagraph 1.h in its
entirety, as referenced above, and is negotiating the resolution of the debt alleged in
SOR subparagraph 1.a. 
Applicant’s contention that he satisfied the phone bill alleged in SOR
subparagraph 1.i is unsupported by record evidence. Given the evidence he provided
chronicling his efforts to resolve the student loan delinquencies, and the evidence
supporting his satisfaction of the credit card, referenced in SOR subparagraph 1.h, I find
that his testimony regarding the payment of the phone bill is credible. I resolve SOR
subparagraph 1.i in his favor.
SOR subparagraph 1.j totals less than $300. Under these circumstances, I
conclude that the nominal negative security significance posed by the fact that it is
unresolved is outweighed by Applicant’s progress in resolving the other delinquent
debts. In sum, I conclude that all of the aforementioned mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
5
 
I considered Applicant’s stellar job performance in the resolution of this case. In
tandem with the circumstances surrounding the incurrence of the delinquencies, and the
steps Applicant has taken to resolve them, I conclude that he has mitigated the security
concern.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
PARAGRAPH 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
