KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F
DIGEST: A clearance decision may be based not only on conduct but also upon circumstances
unrelated to conduct.  The mere existence of foreign family members is well established as a
possible basis for a security clearance denial. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 15-05289.a1
DATE: 01/12/2017
DATE:  January 12, 2017
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-05289
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 25, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 19, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.   Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.   
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant was born in the United States.  His mother, who resides with him, was born in
Mexico and came to the United States illegally in the 1980s.  He supports her financially.  She has
never taken any steps to gain legal immigration status in the United States.  He and his mother have
no contact with anyone in Mexico.  In her Guideline B analysis, the Judge noted, “Applicant is in
a unique situation where he could be a target to Mexican nationals and subjected to coercion or
blackmail if his mother were subjected to deportation or other threats of harm.”  Decision at 6.  
The Judge found against Applicant on a delinquent credit card debt in the approximate
amount of $2,161 that remains unresolved.  He made his last payment on that debt in 2009 and has
not had any contact with the creditor since 2013.  He stated that he plans to pay this debt.  The Judge
also found against Applicant on a payday cash advance loan in the approximate amount of $300 that
remains unresolved.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on the four other Guideline F
allegations.1  The Judge noted that Applicant has not started the process of resolving his debts, that
he brings in more income than he spends but lives paycheck to paycheck, and that he has not shown
an ability to pay all of his delinquent debts and live within his means.  The Judge concluded his
history of financial indebtedness has not been mitigated.   
Discussion
In his appeal brief, Applicant acknowledged that his mother is an illegal alien in the United
States and stated, “. . . I feel that the decision to not give me a security clearance was mainly
influenced by her status and not by my own actions.”  We construe this comment to mean that he
believes the Judge’s conclusion under Guideline B is unfair because it was not based upon his
conduct.  As the Supreme Court stated in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484, U.S. 518, 528-529
(1988), a clearance decision may be based not only on conduct but also upon circumstances
unrelated to conduct.  The mere existence of foreign family members is well established as a
possible basis for a security clearance denial.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶¶ 6 and 7.  It also merits
noting that the Government is not required to provide direct evidence of a nexus between an
applicant’s circumstances and the pertinent security concern.  The Directive presumes a nexus or
rational connection between proven conduct under any Guideline and an applicant’s security
eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2012). 
Applicant also argues that the denial of his security clearance was unfair because his “only
fault” was having a small debt that he was currently working on a plan to pay off.  Of note, nothing
in Guideline F indicates that there is any particular threshold amount of delinquent or otherwise
resolved debts that must be reached before an applicant’s financial difficulties raise a security
1  The Judge found that a collection account for about $180 remained unresolved, but made a formal finding
in favor of Applicant on that debt. 
concern.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-10168 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 1 2003).  Applicant’s arguments
concerning his financial problems amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, which is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached
conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).  The lack of any action to resolve some of the alleged debts
over a significant period was a sufficient basis for the Judge’s determination that the security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial problems remained unmitigated.  
Applicant has failed to identify any harmful error.  “The general standard is that a clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
Department of the Navy v. Egan, supra, at 528.  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
