                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  15-03589           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility to access classified information is granted.
 
Statement of Case
On February 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 21, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on October
25, 2016. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and three exhibits (AEs A-C). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on November 1, 2016.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with payments to SOR creditors 1.a-
1.b and SOR creditors 1.d through 1.f. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted
seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three days to
respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with documented
payments on his SOR creditors 1.a and 1.b debts and payoffs of his SOR  creditors 1.d-
1.f debts. Applicant’s submissions were admitted without objection as AEs D-F. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated six delinquent debts
exceeding $18,000. Allegedly, each of the debts remains delinquent.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of allegations with
explanations. He admitted the SOR creditor 1.a-1.b debts, claiming he fell behind on
making payments due to unemployment issues and is in the process of satisfying these
debts. He admitted his SOR creditor 1.d and 1.e debts, attributing the debts to
unemployment and claiming these debts will be paid off within the ensuing months.
Applicant denied the SOR creditor 1.c and 1.f debts, claiming both debts have been paid.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old senior system engineer of a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted are
incorporated herein. Additional findings will follow. 
Background
Applicant married in May 1985 and divorced his spouse in December 2015. (GE 1;
Tr 36) He has two adult children from this marriage. (GE 1) He earned a high school
diploma but no college degree or diploma within the past 20 years. (GE 1) Applicant
enlisted in the Army June 1985, served seven years of active duty, and received his
honorable discharge in September 1992. (GE 1)
Applicant has worked for his current employer since October 2014 as a senior
system engineer, and between September 2008 and November 2010 for the same
employer. (GE 1). Between October 2010 and October 2014, he worked for another
3
contractor as a senior telecommunications technician (except for a brief three-month
period in 2012 when he was laid off). Applicant has held a security clearance on and off
since 1987. (Tr. 36) 
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts during a period of
unemployment in 2012. (GEs 2-5) He accrued six delinquent debts as follows: SOR
creditors 1.a ($7,091); 1.b ($6,361); 1.c ($3,910); 1.d ($429); 1.e ($236); and 1.f ($629)
between 2012 and 2013. Altogether, Applicant accrued over $18,000 in delinquent debts.
(GEs 2-5) He attributed his delinquent debts to unemployment following a layoff from a
previous employer in 2012. (GE 5; Tr. 36-37) 
Applicant attributed his delinquent accounts to a combination of providing financial
assistance to his children attending college, overextending, and his diminished income
(taking a pay cut of almost $20,000 a year) following his 2012 layoff. (GE 5; Tr. 36)  
Applicant’s SOR 1.a and 1.b creditors involve two credit card accounts with the
same creditor that became delinquent after Applicant was laid off for a brief period in
2012. (GEs 1 and 5) When he tried to resume his payments on these credit cards in
October 2012 after returning to work, he received no response from the creditor and
made no further repayment efforts until after he received the SOR in February 2016. (AEs
A and E; Tr.  ) 
In his interview with an investigator of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
in January 2015, Applicant confirmed the credit card accounts with the creditors listed in
the SOR. (GE 5) He assured the OPM investigator that he would follow up with the
accounts identified as delinquent intended
Applicant has since paid off three of the SOR debts. He documented his payments
of the following SOR debts: his SOR ¶ 1.c debt with a $3,910 payment in 2011 (GEs 2-3
and 5; Tr. 37-39, 48-56); his SOR ¶ 1.d debt with a $429 payment in October 2016 (AEs
B and F); and his  SOR ¶ 1.f debt with a $629 payment in October 2016. (AEs D and F) 
Applicant has a joint payment plan with SOR creditors 1.a and 1.b and
documented his payment plan of September 2016 that calls for payments of $177 a
month, to be deducted from his bank account on the 15  of each month until the creditth
card debts are paid. (AEs A and E) 
Only Applicant’s SOR creditor 1.e remains unresolved, and this debt no longer
appears on Applicant’s credit report. (AE F) Applicant could not identify the creditor ¶ 1.e
debt, and believes it could be covered by the creditor ¶ 1.d debt. (Tr. 41-43, 59-60)
Applicant did not provide any endorsements or performance evaluations. Evidence
of charitable and civic contributions to his community are not available either for weighing.
4
                      Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
5
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of accruing delinquent
accounts with his listed creditors in the SOR. All of his listed debts, except one (SOR  ¶
1.e) have either been paid off or are covered by a repayment plan. His history of
delinquent debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
6
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to a combination of providing financial
assistance to his children attending college, overextending, and his diminished income
following his 2012 layoff.  His problems merit application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Since his return to full-time employment following his 2012 layoff, Applicant’s finances
have improved considerably. Most importantly, he has paid three of his listed debts and
has a payment plan in place with two of the remaining debts. Only the $236 debt
covered by SOR ¶ 1.e remains unresolved. 
Because Applicant has resolved (either by payoffs of payment plan) all of the
listed SOR debts, except for one small account, with verifiable evidence, application of
MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts,” is fully available to him. Prospects for his maintaining his
finances in stable condition are good and leave no reasonable doubts of recurrent
financial difficulties.
Applicant’s repayment efforts to date are fully consistent with the level of financial
progress required to meet the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an
applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts
considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29,
2009). Applicant’s insufficient efforts taken to pay or otherwise resolve his remaining
debts with the resources available to him prevent him from meeting the Appeal Board’s
requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd.
May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing
ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant has provided sufficient evident of the
payment of his delinquent accounts once he returned to full employment status to
demonstrate his seriousness about restoring and maintaining his finances in stable
order. His concerted repayment efforts merit crediting him with demonstrating the levels
of trustworthiness and reliability required to meet minimum security clearance eligibility
criteria. 
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s delinquent debt
accruals and sufficient efforts to address them, his actions to date in addressing his
finances are enough to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline
governing his finances. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f of Guideline F.
7
 Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas: 1.a-1.f:       For Applicant
Conclusio  n  s                            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
