 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
----------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 15-03952 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
January 23, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 30, 2014 Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On May 30, 2015, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 19, 2015, and requested his case 
be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 13, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A complete copy of the file of 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, was provided to Applicant, who 
received the file on January 21, 2016.1  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on April 26, 2016. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 40 and divorced. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks 
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph, which 
allege his failure to file Federal or state income tax returns for the tax year 2013. 
Section 26 of his June 2014 e-QIP (Item 3) concerns Applicant’s Financial Record. 
Applicant admitted in answer to one question that he had not filed the subject tax 
returns, and further stated the reason he did not do so was that he, “Could not afford to 
pay accountant.” Asked to provide a description of any actions he would take to resolve 
the issue he stated, “I [plan] on filing when I can afford to.” Applicant did not submit any 
information showing that he has filed and paid his taxes for 2013, or subsequent years. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has engaged in conduct that shows questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 2.a. Applicant admitted that he was arrested on June 25, 2014, and charged with 
(1) Domestic - Simple Assault/Battery and (2) Domestic – Disorderly Conduct. He filed a 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 6 is inadmissible. It 
will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an interview under oath of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on November 24, 2014. 
A copy of the statement, signed by Applicant, was not provided. Applicant did not adopt the summary as 
his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of 
Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s 
admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
plea of Nolo Contendere and the charges were to be dismissed pending completion of a 
domestic violence course. (Items 4 and 5.) 
 
 2.b. Applicant denied that he falsified material facts on an e-QIP he signed on 
June 30, 2014. His signature certified that his answers were “true, complete, and correct 
to the best of my knowledge and belief.” (Item 3 at page 32.)  
 
Section 22 of the questionnaire, “Police Record,” asks, “In the past seven (7) 
years have you been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in a court or 
criminal proceeding against you?” and “In the past seven (7) years have you been 
arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement 
officer?” (All emphasis in original.) He answered both questions, “No.” These were false 
answers to relevant questions concerning Applicant’s criminal record, especially given 
that he had been arrested for domestic violence five days before signing the e-QIP. As 
stated, Applicant elected not to respond to the FORM, and there is no admissible 
evidence in the file explaining his failure.2 Therefore, I find his answers to be knowingly 
false. 
 
2.c. The Government alleges in this subparagraph that the conduct described 
under Paragraph 1, above, is cognizable under this guideline as well. Applicant did not 
admit or deny this allegation. However, as stated, he admitted the truth of the underlying 
conduct. 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
                                            
2 In Item 6 at page 3 the Government investigator states, “He [Applicant] did not list this arrest because 
he believed that it occurred after he completed his Security Clearance Application. He said that he 
possibly signed paperwork for his Security Clearance Application after the arrest, but had already filled 
out/submitted the application to security officials at [his employer}. He denied any intention to mislead, 
misinform, or to conceal information from the U.S. Government.”  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, one condition applies to the facts found 
in this case: 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant admitted in June 2014 that he had not filed his Federal and state tax 
returns for 2013. No evidence was submitted that he has since done so, or obtained an 
extension of time to file the returns. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Given Applicant’s failure to supply evidence 
showing that he has filed the subject returns, none of the mitigating conditions are 
applicable. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
 
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially 
considered the following:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant knowingly and purposely falsified his e-QIP on June 30, 2014, 
concerning his arrest for domestic violence, and disorderly conduct, five days earlier. 
These two incidents individually and collectively show questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations on Applicant’s 
part.3  
 
 I have reviewed the potential mitigating conditions and find none of them apply to 
the facts of this case. In particular, I have examined the span of time, less than two 
years when the record closed, since the falsifications and criminal conduct. There is 
insufficient evidence that Applicant currently shows good judgment or is trustworthy and 
reliable. Paragraph 2 is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                            
3 The statements in Item 6 are insufficient to show mitigation for Applicant. Even assuming that Applicant 
had filled out the e-QIP before the arrest, and signed it after the arrest; he had an obligation to correct the 
questionnaire to reflect new information. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial irresponsibility and 
personal misconduct were recent, voluntary, and occurred when he was a mature adult. 
Rehabilitation was not demonstrated, nor was unlikelihood of recurrence. Overall, the 
record evidence as described above leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
