 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00931 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 19, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 26, 2016, he changed 
his request to a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on August 9, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on October 7, 2016, scheduling the hearing for November 15, 2016. 
 
2 
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit 
documentary evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He submitted documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 29, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 1987 until he retired with an honorable discharge in 2008. 
He has worked for his current employer or a predecessor contractor since he retired 
from the military. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has held since he 
was in the military. He has an associate’s degree. He married in 1996 and divorced in 
2003. He married again in 2007 and divorced in 2008. He has a 17-year-old child.1 
 
 Applicant had significant tax issues beginning in the 1990s. His first wife handled 
the family finances; he was deployed; and he was unaware that the taxes were not 
being paid. He was unable to catch up on his back taxes, and his taxes for the current 
years were not always paid. His divorce decree specified that his first wife was 
supposed to pay half of the taxes, but she did not. The IRS filed a $33,332 tax lien 
against him in 2008. He has been consistently paying his back taxes for several years. 
Through a combination of installment agreements, seizure of refunds, and the IRS’s 
write-off of some of the old taxes, his back taxes have been completely resolved. The 
IRS seized what would have been his $4,438 refund for tax year 2014. He received a 
$5,404 refund for tax year 2015.2 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $1,820 debt to a property-management company for 
unpaid rent. However, he paid the debt to eliminate it as an issue. His current finances 
are sound. He credibly testified that his financial problems are behind him and there will 
be no further tax issues.3  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19, 26-29, 32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-25, 29-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-8; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-20, 25-26, 30-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-8. 
 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
4 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had financial problems for an extended period, primarily related to 
unpaid taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant has been consistently paying his back taxes for several years. Through 
a combination of installment agreements, seizure of refunds, and the IRS’s write-off of 
some of the old taxes, his back taxes have been completely resolved. He also paid the 
non-tax debt. I am satisfied that Applicant’s finances are in order. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 
and 20(d) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
5 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his steady employment 
with a defense contractor. His tax issues are resolved and his current finances are 
sound.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
