                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-00105
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems began with the breakup of his marriage in 2009
and were exacerbated by a significant pay cut in 2013. Unable to make significant
progress in paying his debts until recently, Applicant nonetheless acted responsibly
under the circumstances. He has resolved most of his debts and his financial condition
is stable. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On May 3, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a
security clearance.  1
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
On August 24, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for financial2
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer), which
included 11 enclosed documents, and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to
an administrative judge on January 8, 2016, but later was transferred to me on June 6,
2016, and I convened a hearing on August 8, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled.
Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4.  Applicant testified in3
his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - Z.  I left the record open4
after the hearing to receive additional relevant information. The record closed on August
17, 2016, when I received Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. They are included in
the record as Ax. AA – MM.  All exhibits were admitted without objection. A transcript of5
the hearing (Tr.) was received on August 16, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant had ten delinquent or
past-due debts totaling $37,735 (SOR 1.a - 1.j). In response, Applicant denied SOR 1.a,
1.h, and 1.j. He admitted the remaining SOR allegations. In addition to the facts thus
established, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 60 years old and has worked in the defense industry since he retired
from the Navy in March 1995 after 20 years of honorable service. Applicant has held
military and industrial security clearances since 1975. (Gx. 1; Tr. 21 - 22, 44)
Applicant has been married three times. His most recent marriage produced one
child, now an adult, and ended by divorce in 2011. Applicant’s financial problems began
in 2009 when his third wife emptied their checking account. He was unable to pay their
regular household expenses in the short term and could not stay current with their
regular financial obligations for several years. 
As a result of their divorce, Applicant was ordered to pay his ex-wife $2,650 each
month. She also was awarded 40 percent of his monthly Navy retired pay. Applicant
also paid in excess of $6,000 in legal fees to finalize the divorce, the decree of which
included a division of marital-debt responsibilities. Of the debts alleged in the SOR,
Applicant’s ex-wife was required to pay SOR 1.h but never did. Additionally, the
delinquent debt at SOR 1.j was for an account opened by his ex-wife after they
separated. Both debts have been resolved through Applicant’s negotiations with those
creditors. Applicant’s ex-wife died in March 2016, thus ending Applicant’s support
obligations and restoring his full military retired pay. (Answer; Gx. 1; Ax. A - F; Tr. 24 -
25, 41 - 42, 63 - 65)
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Included as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1 is a list identifying those exhibits as Applicant’s EQIP and three credit3
reports.
 Ax. A - K were previously submitted as enclosures to Applicant’s Answer.4
 Applicant originally labeled his post-hearing submissions as Ax. Y - KK. I have re-labeled those exhibits to5
conform to the record, which already included Ax. Y and Z.
2
In July 2013, Applicant negotiated a reduction in the court-ordered monthly
support payment to his ex-wife to $1,828. However, in October 2013, Applicant’s
employer presented him with a choice between being laid off as part of a reduction in
force or taking a 30 percent pay cut. He chose the latter, which further limited his ability
to resolve his past-due debts. Nonetheless, Applicant pursued resolution of the debts
assigned to his ex-wife when he became aware they had not been paid. He also
contacted his other creditors and was able to settle or otherwise resolve the debts
alleged at SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.e and 1.f. (Answer; Ax. A - K, CC - GG; Tr. 25, 41)
In early 2014, Applicant’s mother required assistive care because she suffered
from Alzheimer’s disease. Applicant and his siblings shared the costs of their mother’s
care because their mother did not have sufficient medical insurance. His mother died in
October 2015, ending Applicant’s financial obligations to her or her estate. (Answer; Ax.
AA, II - LL; Tr. 34 - 35, 57 - 59)
Most of the money used to resolve his debts was loaned to Applicant by a friend.
He is repaying the loan through $500 monthly payments. Applicant had previously
sought professional financial counseling that produced a debt-management plan (DMP)
that would have repaid his debts through 40 monthly $861 payments. Applicant opted
instead for the lower payments and faster debt resolution through a personal loan.
(Answer; Ax. X; Ax. MM; Tr. 36 - 41, 60 - 63)
When Applicant met with a financial counselor in January 2016 to establish the
DMP, it was projected that he would have about $300 remaining each month after
paying all of his regular monthly obligations, including his court-ordered spousal support
and an $861 DMP payment. Since his ex-wife’s death in March 2016, Applicant’s
available monthly income has increased by more than $2,000, and he has not incurred
any new delinquent or past-due debts. He also is paying about $300 less each month
as part of his debt resolution efforts.
Applicant has a good reputation in the workplace. Co-workers and supervisors
alike hold him in high regard for his professionalism, honesty, trustworthiness, and
reliability. (Ax. L)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
 See Directive. 6.3.6
3
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a8
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government established its case through sufficient and reliable information
that supports the SOR allegations under this guideline. The facts established by this
record reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed,
in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), available information reflects an
inability, not an unwillingness, to pay his debts. The record also supports application of
the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).9
4
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his ex-wife’s financial
malfeasance in April 2009. Thereafter, a combination of the costs of his divorce, a
significant spousal support obligation, the costs of his mother’s end-of-life care, and a
2013 pay cut exacerbated his financial problems. Applicant responded to those events
and circumstances responsibly by petitioning the court for a reduction in his spousal
support obligation. He also tried with mixed success to negotiate settlements with his
creditors. Finally, he recently has been able to actually resolve most of the debts listed
in the SOR and his personal finances again appear to be sound. On balance, I conclude
the foregoing is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about Applicant’s finances.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant retired after a 20-year career in the Navy and has held a security
clearance in a variety of contexts for most of the past 40 years. His financial problems
arose from circumstances beyond his control, and he has acted responsibly in dealing
with those problems. Applicant’s good reputation for trustworthiness and reliability
supports a conclusion that he is not likely to experience additional financial problems. A
fair and commonsense assessment of the record as a whole shows the security
concerns raised by the Government’s information are mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
5
