 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01579 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 19, 2016, and he elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 15, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on March 23, 2016. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns.  
He did not provide any response. The case was assigned to me on December 15, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5. FORM Item 3 
consists of three unauthenticated summaries of interviews with a government 
background investigator conducted in October 2012. In the FORM, Department Counsel 
advised Applicant that he could object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or 
that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make 
it accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise 
any objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, and he raised no objections. Given 
Department Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s education and work experience, I 
found the waiver to be knowing and intelligent.1  Therefore, I admitted FORM Item 3 into 
evidence as Government Exhibit 3. 
 
FORM Items 2, 4, and 5, are also admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 
2, 4, and 5, without objection.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent credit card accounts totaling approximately 
$21,678. Applicant denied both allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He received an associate’s degree from a 
technical/trade school in March 1979. He attended some undergraduate classes in 
2008-09. Applicant has been married since October 1984, and he has two adult 
stepchildren.3  
 
 Applicant had two extended periods of unemployment in the last decade. From 
June to November 2006, he was employed full time. He was unemployed from 
November 2006 to April 2007. From April 2007 to July 2010, he was gainfully employed 
full time,4 with a monthly net income of approximately $2,700. He was unexpectedly laid 
off in July 2010, and he remained unemployed until June 2012. Since July 2012, he has 
been employed full time by a DOD contractor. As of his October 2012 interviews, 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016)(Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.  The Judge’s exclusion of the Report of Interview, containing 
mitigating evidence, was found to be error following applicant’s appeal.).   
 
2 See  ISCR Case No. 14-06781 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016)(By not responding to the Government’s 
FORM, “Applicant waived any objection he might have had to this document.”). 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s monthly net income was approximately $2,900.  His wife’s net monthly 
income was approximately $3,675.  After deduction of their monthly expenses ($2,955), 
their estimated net monthly remainder was approximately $3,620.5 
 
 The account in SOR ¶ 1.a. was opened in October 2007, and the last payment 
was in about May 2009. This account was later charged off in the approximate amount 
of $13,345.6 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he had defaulted on 
this account in 2009, and he claimed to have attempted to negotiate payments with the 
creditor. Applicant further claimed to have signed a letter in 2013 “closing the matter” 
and that he “understood that [his] credit report would reflect the unpaid debt for seven 
years and [he] would have to accept the credit report reflecting this debt unpaid in full 
and sign off.”7 Applicant provided no documentation to substantiate his claims about the 
attempted negotiations or the 2013 letter. There is no evidence of any payments on this 
debt since 2009. 
 
 The account in SOR ¶ 1.b. was opened in September 2003, and the last 
payment was in about September 2009. This account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $8,333.8 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he 
had defaulted on this account in 2008, and he claimed to have settled this account in 
May 2014; however, he provided no documentation to substantiate his claims of 
settlement. 
 
 In October 2012, Applicant was interviewed three times by a government 
investigator about the two delinquent debts.  He provided conflicting information about 
which creditor filed a lawsuit against him, and he provided no documentation as to how 
the suit was resolved.9   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Items 4 and 5. 
 
7 Applicant’s response to SOR (FORM Item 1). 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Item 3 (During the first and third interviews, he stated that the lawsuit concerned the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b.  During the second interview, he stated that the lawsuit concerned the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a., and he provided the account number linked to this creditor. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”10 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 
F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11   
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The two alleged debts, which became delinquent in mid-2009, total 
approximately $21,678. Thus, the evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The Government established its case for disqualification. Accordingly, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.12 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government.13 Conditions that could mitigate the 
financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
12 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
There is no documentary evidence to establish that these debts have been 
resolved or that Applicant took steps to resolve or repay them. Therefore, I cannot find 
that these issues are unlikely to recur and doubts remain as to Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both (1) Applicant’s financial indebtedness 
resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.14 Both debts became delinquent while both Applicant and his 
wife were gainfully employed in 2009. Applicant failed to provide evidence that his 
failure to pay his debts resulted from circumstances beyond his control. Nonetheless, I 
have considered that Applicant’s 2010 layoff and his subsequent period of 
unemployment may have impacted his ability to pay these debts and have determined 
that they may constitute circumstances beyond one’s control in the context of AG ¶ 
20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not require an applicant to be 
debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously.15  
In this case, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant acted responsibly 
to address his delinquent debts or to develop and implement a reasonable debt 
repayment plan. Applicant provided no documentation to substantiate his claims as to 
any negotiations with creditors, settlement payment as to SOR ¶ 1.b., or to explain why 
he is not liable as to SOR ¶ 1.a. Finally, in light of Applicant’s net monthly remainder (as 
of October 2012) in the approximate amount of $3,600, Applicant has failed to explain 
why he did not take steps to resolve the both delinquent debts at that time. Because 
Applicant did not provide documentary evidence of a plan to resolve his delinquent 
debts or of any steps taken in furtherance of a debt resolution plan, I conclude that AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply.  
 
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009)(“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
 
7 
 
There is no record evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant claimed to have made payments on SOR ¶ 1.b., but he provided no 
documentation in support of this claim. Applicant has not met his burdens of production 
or persuasion to show good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.   
 
 Applicant admitted that he defaulted on this credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. and 
that its delinquency will be reflected on his credit report for seven years, yet he denied 
this debt. To the extent he disputes this debt, he has not provided the requisite 
documentation to establish a reasonable basis for his dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Absent documentary evidence of debt repayment or resolution and financial 
responsibility, particularly in light of Applicant’s net monthly remainder, I find that 
financial considerations concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
In light of all of the facts, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 
2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant was provided an opportunity in his SOR response and in response to 
the Government’s FORM to show what steps he has taken to resolve these 
delinquencies, and to provide documentation. He was aware that the two alleged 
delinquent credit card debts were a security concern, and he failed to provide 
documentary evidence of his efforts to resolve these debts. Although Applicant’s 
unemployment contributed to his financial delinquencies, he failed to explain his failure 
 
8 
 
to develop and implement a debt repayment plan in light of his significant net monthly 
remainder. Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The totality of the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
