 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03677 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 22, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
March 30, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not object to the Government evidence identified as Items 1 through 6, 
and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant submitted documents that were 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A though C, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and denied the 
allegations in 1.c and 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He is a high school graduate. He has worked for his 
employer since 1980. He was married from 1979 to 1984. He remarried in 1999. He has 
seven adult children and two adult stepchildren. 
 
 Applicant purchased a house in 2005 for $238,000. In 2008, his wife lost her job, 
and he had difficulty making his monthly mortgage payments.1  
 
After Applicant got behind on his mortgage payments, he began working with a 
company that told him it could lower his mortgage payments. He paid the company and 
was told to stop making any mortgage payments, so the mortgage lender would 
negotiate a lower payment. Later the company told him it could not lower his mortgage 
payment. Applicant and his wife decided they would do a short sale on the house. 
Because the house had mold they thought they would have difficulty selling it, so they 
anticipated having to file bankruptcy. They moved out of the house in May 2015. In 
anticipation of filing bankruptcy, they stopped paying some of their bills. The house sold 
in January 2016.2  
 
 There are two mortgage loans alleged in SOR. The loan in SOR ¶ 1.c ($48,600) 
is listed in the credit reports as a second mortgage and charged off. The other mortgage 
in SOR ¶ 1.d is listed as a conventional real estate mortgage of $217,001 with a 
delinquent balance of $54,381. Both loans are listed in credit reports from May 2013, 
March 2015, and October 2015.  
 
Loan numbers provided on documents Applicant submitted correspond to the 
mortgage loans listed in his credit reports. As part of his answer, Applicant provided 
documents from the mortgage company that verifies that the second mortgage loan with 
the same account number as in SOR ¶ 1.c has been paid and the lien has been 
released.3 
                                                          
1 AE A is a response to the FORM that is written by Applicant’s wife. In it she takes responsibility for 
handling the family finances.  
 
2 Items 3, 4, 5, 6; AE A, C. 
 
3 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
 
 As part of Applicant’s response to the FORM, he provided a document from the 
original lender that states: “We have enclosed the documents in connection with the 
payoff of the above reference loan.” It references the conventional mortgage loan in 
SOR ¶ 1.d.4  
 
 Applicant’s wife handled all of the finances, and he is generally unfamiliar with 
them and was unaware of their financial problems. He was going to take a loan from his 
401k to pay his delinquent medical bills and any other late bills. Although Applicant did 
not provide documents to show he paid the small medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - $275 and 
1.b - $141), I found his statement credible. No other information was provided about 
Applicant’s current financial situation. No evidence of financial counseling was 
provided.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
4 AE B. 
 
5 Item 1, AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.6 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant had debts that became delinquent. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial problems in 2008 when his wife became 
unemployed. He had difficulty making his mortgage payments. He also had two medical 
debts that he intends to resolve. Applicant stated that he was able to short sell his 
house in January 2016. The documents substantiate that both mortgage loans are 
resolved (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). Applicant’s debts occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s unemployment and his 
unfamiliarity with their finances. Applicant’s wife’s unemployment was beyond his 
control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant was able to short sell his house and resolve his 
mortgage loans. He acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant has resolved his mortgage loans. He intends to resolve the two small 
medical debts. There is evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved 
and are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 60 years old. He has worked for his employer since 1980. His wife 
became unemployed in 2008 and he was unable to pay his mortgage. He short sold his 
house in January 2016 and resolved his mortgage loans. He intends to resolve the 
small medical debts, which are a modest amount that would not raise a security 
concern. Applicant has met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
