 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ADP Case No. 15-03786 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant emigrated from Indonesia to the United States in 1992, and his 
connections to Indonesia are limited. He gave his Indonesian passport to his security 
officer in 2016. Foreign influence and foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are 
mitigated. Applicant stopped making payments on delinquent debts of $41,189 and 
$147,232 around 2010, and he did not provide evidence of ongoing contacts with the 
creditor or sufficient evidence of the status of these two debts. Financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated, and eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2014, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
National Security Position (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On December 9, 2015, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 
1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence), C (foreign preference), and F (financial considerations). (Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. 
(HE 2) The DOD CAF recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether such access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (HE 2)  
 
On December 28, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. (HE 3) On 
June 27, 2016, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed. On August 
15, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On September 12, 2016, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for October 6, 2016. 
(HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, the Government provided 
four exhibits; Applicant offered eight exhibits; and all exhibits were admitted into 
evidence without objection. (Tr. 19-23; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-H) On October 
12, 2016, I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.). On November 30, 2016, Applicant 
submitted one document, which was admitted into evidence without objection. (AE I) On 
December 6, 2016, the record closed. (Tr. 44, 77, 85-86)   
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel provided a summary reflecting the facts raising a 
trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s connections to Indonesia as well as two 
exhibits for administrative notice to support the summary. (GE 4; I-II) Administrative or 
official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 
2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d 
Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that 
are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, 
Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative 
notice). Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of the proffered 
documents, and Department Counsel’s request was granted. Department Counsel’s 
summary is quoted without footnotes in the section labeled “Indonesia” infra.   
     
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a, 3.a, and 3b. He also 
provided explanations and mitigating information. (HE 2) His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a contractor, and he has been employed 
by the same contractor in information technology as a system engineer for 15 years. 
(Tr. 5-6, 15) Applicant was born in Indonesia. (Tr. 6) In 1992, when he was 19 years old, 
he emigrated from Indonesia to the United States, and in 2014, he was naturalized as a 
U.S. citizen. (Tr. 7) He has not served in the U.S. military or Indonesian military. (Tr. 6) 
He has never married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 6-7)  
 
From 1998 to 2001, Applicant worked for a non-DOD federal agency, and from 
2001 to 2005, he worked for Tricare Management Activity. (Tr. 15) From 2005 to 2014, 
he worked for a local government and police department. (Tr. 15) From 2014 to present, 
he worked for the Defense Health Affairs. (Tr. 15) He has not had any professional or 
ethical lapses or disclosures of sensitive information. (Tr. 15) He describes himself as 
loyal, ethical, professional, and trustworthy. (Tr. 15-16)   
 
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant’s mother and two brothers are citizens and residents of Indonesia. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a response) His mother is a 69-year-old retired real estate agent. (Tr. 17, 24) 
His brothers have no association or employment with the Indonesian Government. (Tr. 
17) He does not contact his brothers, and he communicates with his mother about once 
a month. (Tr. 24) His most recent visit to Indonesia was in 2009. (Tr. 25) He does not 
own any property in Indonesia, and he does not provide any financial assistance to 
anyone in Indonesia. (Tr. 25) He intends to remain in the United States and to retire in 
the United States. (Tr. 28)    
 
In 1998, Applicant requested, and in 1999, he was granted political asylum in the 
United States because of the Indonesian Government’s mistreatment of individuals of 
Chinese-Indonesian descent. (Tr. 16; SOR ¶ 1.b response) Applicant feared 
persecution if he returned to Indonesia. (Tr. 16-17) He was not a dissident or a leader in 
an Indonesian anti-government movement. (Tr. 17) The current Indonesia Government 
is committed to the rule of law, and when Applicant returned to Indonesia in 2009, he 
was not persecuted, harassed, or threatened. (Tr. 17)   
 
Applicant retained his Indonesian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. (SOR ¶ 
2.a response) On September 21, 2016, Applicant provided his Indonesian passport to 
his security manager, and his security manager defaced and invalidated his Indonesian 
passport. (AE F) His security manager retained Applicant’s defaced Indonesian 
passport. (AE F)   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant conceded that the foreclosure of his rental property was “due to [his] 
financial mismanagement.” (Tr. 18) It was also caused by the an unexpected significant 
decline in real estate values from around 2008 to 2010. (Tr. 18)  
 
Applicant’s October 10, 2014 credit report reflects: he opened a home equity line 
of credit in November 2005; the last act on account was in July 2010; the past due 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
amount was $41,189; the account was charged off; and there was a “dispute following 
resolution.” (GE 3 at 8) Applicant’s October 10, 2014 credit report also indicates: he 
opened a home equity line of credit in August 2007; the last act on account was in 
September 2010; the past due amount was $147,232; the account is in collections; and 
“consumer disputes after resolution.” (GE 3 at 8)   
 
SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b allege delinquent debts of $41,189 and $147,232 owed to 
the same mortgage company. Applicant said he purchased a rental property in 2007, for 
almost $400,000. (Tr. 30-31)2 He believed he could make some repairs, and then resell 
his rental property and make a profit. (Tr. 31) He rented the property for about three 
years; however, he had a negative cash flow of about $1,000 per month. (Tr. 31-32) He 
unsuccessfully attempted to short sale the property. (Tr. 32) In 2010, the property went 
into foreclosure. (Tr. 32) Applicant believes “the deficit that was not written off, I guess 
it’s whatever the amount was stated in there. I think it’s $144,000.” (Tr. 29) He said the 
bank decided not to file a lawsuit against Applicant because he had no assets. (Tr. 30) 
He has not heard from the creditor for four or five years. (Tr. 33, 38) He said he could 
not afford any payment plans. (Tr. 33) He did not dispute that the deficit after the 
foreclosure was $144,000. (Tr. 39) He said an attorney told him “to ignore any 
deficiency request from the bank because he said after awhile if - - if they found out that 
I have no asset[s], the debt will be [written] off.” (Tr. 40)   
 
Applicant received financial counseling, and he consulted a bankruptcy attorney. 
(Tr. 18) He uses a budget and controls his credit card use. (Tr. 18) He reduced his 
credit card debt from $44,000 to zero. (Tr. 18) He is current with all of his bills. (Tr. 18) 
His credit score is now 743, which is an “excellent” score. (Tr. 18; AE H) His current 
annual salary is $101,000. (Tr. 33) After paying his expenses and setting aside funds for 
his 401(k) account, he has a remainder of $200 to $300 for emergencies. (Tr. 34) In 
2010, his 401(k) account totaled about $20,000 to $30,000. (Tr. 30) Applicant currently 
has $120,000 in his 401(k) account. (Tr. 26)    
 
Applicant asked for time to find out the status of his debt and “to make suitable 
arrangement[s].” (Tr. 40-41) I highlighted at the hearing the necessity of resolving his 
$41,189 and his $147,232 debts, which were owed to the same creditor. (Tr. 42-43; GE 
3 at 8) I requested, and he agreed, to contact the creditor and find out the status of 
these two debts. (Tr. 43-44, 46) I gave him 60 days to provide additional information 
about these two debts. (Tr. 44)    
  
After his hearing, Applicant stated:  
 
On May 16, 2014, Maryland Governor Martin O’Malley signed a law 
(Maryland Rule 14-216) limiting the time banks can seek a deficiency 
judgment following a foreclosure to 3 years. This law applied retroactively 
                                            
2Applicant’s October 10, 2014 credit report indicates he had a $387,450 mortgage account that 
was 180 days past due, and it was redeemed through foreclosure. (GE 3 at 8) Applicant did not discuss 
whether a tenant occupied the rental property until the foreclosure or whether he made partial payments 
to the mortgage lender until the foreclosure.  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to foreclosures at the height of the national housing crisis going back to 
2008. 
 
A deficiency judgement is sought when a foreclosure sale doesn’t cover 
the balance and interest on a mortgage. In Maryland, the lender may file a 
motion for a deficiency judgment within three years after ratification of the 
auditor’s report (Maryland Rule 14-216) which in my case is in 2011. 
 
None of my creditors has filed deficiency of judgement in the case of my 
foreclosure. At this point, they are beyond the Statu[t]e of Limitation for 
debt collection. Both items on Government Exhibit 3 are no longer valid. 
(AE I) 
 
Maryland Rule 14-216 reads: 
 
(a) Distribution of Surplus. At any time after a sale of property and 
before final ratification of the auditor’s account, any person claiming an 
interest in the property or in the proceeds of the sale of the property may 
file an application for the payment of that person's claim from the surplus 
proceeds of the sale. The court shall order distribution of the surplus 
equitably among the claimants. 
 
(b) Deficiency Judgment. At any time within three years after the final 
ratification of the auditor’s report, a secured party or any appropriate party 
in interest may file a motion for a deficiency judgment if the proceeds of 
the sale, after deducting all costs and expenses allowed by the court, are 
insufficient to satisfy the debt and accrued interest. If the person against 
whom the judgment is sought is a party to the action, the motion shall be 
served in accordance with Rule 1-321. Otherwise, the motion shall be 
served in accordance with Rule 2-121 and shall be accompanied by a 
notice advising the person that any response to the motion must be filed 
within 30 days after being served or within any applicable longer time 
prescribed by Rule 2-321(b) for answering a complaint. A copy of Rule 2-
321(b) shall be attached to the notice. 
 
Applicant did not describe how he knew that the creditor had not sought or obtained a 
deficiency judgment. He did not indicate he contacted the creditor. He did not provide 
any correspondence from the creditor or any foreclosure records. He did not provide 
any Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1099-Cs, which are used by creditors to 
disclose to the IRS that a debt is forgiven. He did not indicate he searched the property 
records for evidence of any deficiency. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s work colleague has known Applicant for more than 10 years, and he 
described Applicant as ethical, professional, reliable, diligent, and trustworthy. (AE D) 
This statement supports approval of his eligibility for a public trust position. (AE D)  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Indonesia 
 
Indonesia is a multiparty democracy. Civilian authorities generally 
maintain effective control over security forces. . . . [W]idespread corruption 
remained a problem, and some elements within the government, judiciary, 
and security forces obstructed corruption investigations and persecuted 
their accusers. Elements within the government applied treason, 
blasphemy, defamation, and decency laws to limit freedom of expression 
and assembly. . . . [B]oth military and police committed unjustified killings 
[and] used excessive force resulting in death during arrests, 
investigations, crowd control situations, and other operations.  .  .  . On 
January 14, 2016, terrorists attacked civilians in Central Jakarta using 
guns and explosives. ISIL claimed responsibility for the attack. Currently, 
travel by U.S. government personnel to Central Salawesi and Papua is 
restricted to mission-essential travel that is approved in advance by the 
Embassy security office.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.2, and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met 
for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concern about “foreign contacts and 
interests” stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s mother and two brothers are citizens and residents of Indonesia. His 
mother is a 69-year-old retired real estate agent. His brothers have no association with 
the Indonesian Government. He does not contact his brothers, and he communicates 
with his mother about once a month. His most recent visit to Indonesia was in 2009. He 
does not own any property in Indonesia, and he does not provide any financial 
assistance to anyone in Indonesia.     
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Indonesia, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood whether an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely 
accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the government is engaged is counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a 
substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship of 
Indonesia with the United States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members 
living in Indonesia do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a 
position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a 
desire to assist a family member living in Indonesia.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Indonesia seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence of Applicant’s contact with his mother and has raised the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to 
the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant has frequent contact with his mother, who is a 
citizen and resident of Indonesia. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant immigrated to 
the United States in 1992, when he was 19 years old. In 2014, he was naturalized as a 
U.S. citizen.    
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
any interest in property or bank accounts in Indonesia. However, this mitigating 
condition can only fully mitigate the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” All of Applicant’s assets are in the 
United States.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his mother living in Indonesia are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His residence in the United States 
since 1992, his employment is in support of the U.S. Government, and his U.S. 
citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation of trustworthiness 
concerns. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully 
mitigate the foreign influence trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B.    
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference trustworthiness concern stating, “when 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a) describes one condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern 
and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case: “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen . . . . This includes but is 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport.” Applicant, who is a citizen of 
the United States, possessed a current Indonesian passport. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies to 
his possession of a current Indonesian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen.    
  
AG ¶ 11(e) provides one condition that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
as follows: “(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” AG ¶ 11(e) applies to his possession of an 
Indonesian passport. On September 21, 2016, Applicant provided his Indonesian 
passport to his security manager, and his security manager defaced and invalidated his 
Indonesian passport. Foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are mitigated.     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations trustworthiness concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets 
as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s [eligibility for a public trust position].  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR 
response, SCA, credit report, and hearing record establish the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
  
   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
No mitigating conditions fully apply; however, Applicant presented some positive 
financial information. Circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances. 
The value of real estate had an unexpected and exceptional decline in the 2008 to 2010 
timeframe, and the value of his rental property became less than the amount he owed 
on the property.   
 
The negative financial considerations concerns are more substantial. SOR ¶¶ 3.a 
and 3.b allege and the record establishes delinquent debts of $41,189 and $147,232 
Applicant owed to the same mortgage company. Applicant purchased a rental property 
in 2007, for almost $400,000. He rented the property for about three years; however, he 
had a negative cash flow of about $1,000 per month. He unsuccessfully attempted to 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
short sale the property, and in 2010, the property went into foreclosure. He has not 
heard from the creditor for four or five years. 
 
From 2010 to 2016, Applicant increased his 401(k) account from about $20,000 
to $30,000 to $100,000. His current annual income is $101,000. He did not make any 
attempts to settle the debts for four or five years. The creditor may not have sought a 
deficiency judgment against Applicant or the debt could be collection-barred by the state 
statute of limitations, which is four years for most contract-based debts. See Code of 
Maryland § 2–725.   
 
In a series of decisions, the Appeal Board has rejected statutes of limitations for 
debts generated through contracts, which is the law in all 50 states, as significantly 
mitigating financial considerations concerns under AG ¶ 20(d). See ISCR Case No. 08-
01122 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 
2008); ADP Case No. 07-13041 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-
11814 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2008) ADP Case No. 06-14616 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 18, 
2007) (stating, “reliance upon legal defenses such as the statute of limitations does not 
necessarily demonstrate prudence, honesty, and reliability; therefore, such reliance is of 
diminished probative value in resolving trustworthiness concerns arising out of financial 
problems. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).”). 
 
Recently, the DOHA Appeal Board reinforced its position on statutes of 
limitations not mitigating financial considerations concerns stating: 
 
In this case, the Judge noted that Applicant explained that he did not owe 
any of the alleged debts because they had either been deleted from his 
credit report or soon would be deleted, and he also relied on a state 
statute of limitations to absolve himself of debts. The Appeal Board has 
long recognized that debts remain relevant for [trustworthiness or] security 
clearance purposes even if they are no longer enforceable due to the 
running of the statute of limitations or cannot be legally listed on a credit 
report due to the passage of time. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-04779 at 4 
(App. Bd. Jul. 20, 2005) and ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 6 (App. Bd. Oct 
26, 2006).4 We also have held that reliance on a state’s statute of 
limitations does not constitute a good-faith effort to resolve financial 
difficulties and is of limited mitigative value. ADP Case No. 06-18900 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-04779 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Jul. 20, 2005) and ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 
2003)). 
 
ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2016). 
 
Applicant presented a credit report with a 743 score; however, it did not mention 
the two delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b. The Appeal Board’s position is “that 
                                            
4 Compare ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2014). In that case, Applicant corroborated 
efforts to settle debts that were in “charged-off” status. Also, that Applicant had received financial 
counseling. Ultimately, the Board affirmed the Judge’s favorable decision. 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
some debts have dropped off his credit report is not meaningful evidence of debt 
resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015)). 
         
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving the debts in SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b. He did not make a 
sufficient effort to settle or investigate the status of these two SOR debts. There is not 
enough assurance that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and 
will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that 
financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B, C, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a contractor, and he has been employed 
by the same contractor in information technology as a system engineer for 15 years. 
Applicant was born in Indonesia. In 1992, when he was 19 years old, he emigrated from 
Indonesia to the United States, and in 2014, he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. He 
successfully worked for the following entities: for a non-DOD federal agency from 1998 
to 2001; for Tricare Management Activity from 2001 to 2005; for a local government and 
police department from 2005 to 2014; and for the Defense Health Affairs from 2014 to 
present. He has not had any professional or ethical lapses or disclosures of sensitive 
information. He describes himself as loyal, ethical, professional, and trustworthy.   
 
Applicant’s work colleague has known Applicant for more than 10 years, and he 
described Applicant as ethical, professional, reliable, diligent, and trustworthy. His 
colleague’s statement supports approval of Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position.    
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The negative financial information is more significant. The primary problem here 
is that Applicant has owed delinquent debts of $41,189 and $147,232 to the same 
mortgage company since 2010. He admitted he did not remain in contact with the 
creditor for four or five years. He was given additional time after his hearing to contact 
the creditor to provide a definitive status of the debts and possibly to settle them. He did 
not provide any evidence that he contacted the creditor. He did not provide enough 
evidence of efforts to clarify the status, resolve, settle, or mitigate the two debts.      
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of 
access to sensitive information. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns lead me to conclude that grant of access to 
sensitive information to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not 
be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of 
reform necessary for award of a public trust position in the future. With a track record of 
behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of his worthiness for a public trust position.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Foreign influence and foreign preference trustworthiness concerns are 
mitigated; however, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
 
