                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
)     ISCR Case No.15-00934
)
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated October 30, 2015. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material, (FORM), dated March 14, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on March 25,1
2016. Applicant responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 3,
The Government submitted seven items for the record.      1
1
2017. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five SOR allegations, and denied
the remaining allegations. He provided explanations for the allegations under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations).
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active
duty in the military (U.S. Air Force) from 1984 to 2004, when he retired, receiving an
honorable discharge. He is married with three children. He obtained his Associate’s
degree in 2011. Applicant has worked for his current employer since May 2007. (Item 3)
He completed a security clearance application in April 2014. He has held a security
clearance for more than 30 years.
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts including eight medical accounts, three
education accounts, and collection accounts. (Items 5 and 6) The delinquent debts
totaled about $16,286. (Item 1) He  admitted to owing about $12,832 to five SOR
creditors. (Item 3)
In his answer to the SOR Applicant stated that he made payments on some
debts; disputed others; paid some; and that others were invalid and have been
removed from his credit report. He specifically noted that the medical accounts (SOR
1.e through 1.o, with the exception of 1.f) were paid by Applicant’s supplemental
insurance and were deemed invalid and removed from his credit report dated April 21,
2016. (Response to FORM, EX 3)
Applicant stated that he was unemployed in 2005. The unemployment lasted for
about one year, and he used his life’s savings to provide for his wife and three children.
When he found employment in 2006, he earned 60% less pay than his previous
income. In 2007, he was hired by another company with a slight increase in pay, but still
less than his earnings in 2005. In the following years, he received promotions and pay
raises. He continued to pay delinquent debts and his other bills are being paid on a
monthly basis. He believes in honoring all his debts. He will continue to make payments
until all debts are settled. (Answer to SOR, Item 3)
In addition, his wife had severe health issues which necessitated resigning from
her full time position. Applicant realized that he relied heavily on credit cards from 2007
through 2008, in order to fill the income gap. He consulted an attorney in 2009, and was
advised to file for bankruptcy. Applicant did not want to pursue that route. He wanted to
pay his creditors. He stated that he made several payment plans. He acknowledged
that he did not have sufficient income to pay his tax debts for 2008, 2009, and 2010 in
full. He made monthly payments and his refunds were intercepted. Applicant claimed
2
that he has paid about $80,000 in debt from 2008 until 2013. In 2012, his wife was
diagnosed with another illness.
Specifically, as to the medical debts, which are the result of his wife’s breast
cancer, he challenged those accounts on his credit report because all the medical
accounts should have been paid by his insurance. He stated that they are no longer on
his credit report. 
In Applicant’s response to FORM, he provided the following supplemental
information for each account: 
As to SOR 1.a, a collection account in the amount of $3,357, Applicant received
a 1099-C in 2012, after the creditor stopped withdrawing the monthly amount in 2011.
He noted that it stated the debt was forgiven. He disclosed the amount owed on his
income tax return and believed the matter was settled. When he learned in 2014, that it
was on his credit report, he investigated the matter. He had automatic monthly
payments of $100 deducted from his checking account in 2009.  He settled the debt in
2016. (EX 1a) 
As to SOR 1.b, a collection account in the amount of $3,258, Applicant received
a 1099-C in 2012 stating that the debt had been forgiven. He again assumed the debt
was settled and he disclosed the income on his tax return.  This is the same creditor as
noted in SOR 1.a. The same scenario occurred and in 2016, Applicant settled the
account. (EX2-2a)
As to SOR 1.c, for a 2010 cellular bill in the amount of $504, Applicant disputed
the bill with the credit agencies, as noted on an older credit bureau report, and it has
been successfully resolved. (EX 4)
As to SOR 1.d, for an education collection account in the amount of $487, this
was the result of a college course that Applicant dropped before the deadline for
payment.  He believed this was not a valid debt, but documentation could not be found.
He paid the bill in full in 2016. (EX 4)
As to SOR 1.f, for an education account in collection in the amount of $267, this
debt was the result of book fees and supplies in college. He believed that the $100
monthly payments he made to the school included this amount. However, the VA
transferred the account to the Treasury department. Applicant paid the debt in full in
2016. (EX 5)
As to  SOR 1;l, in the amount of $811, for another education account, this was
the result of an overpayment from the VA. Applicant learned about the account and
made monthly payments to settle the debt. In December 2014, it was paid in full. ( (EX
3)
As to SOR 1.m, for a cable account in the amount of $403, the account was the
result of equipment related to his cable account. Applicant maintains that he returned
3
the equipment. He could not find a receipt but he disputed the account. The dispute
was successful, and it was removed from his credit report. (Ex 3)
As to SOR 1.p, for past-due tax (2009) in the amount of $1,869 to the IRS,
Applicant presented his payment plan. He was unable to pay his taxes in full for the
2009 filing. The current balance is $31.72. Applicant presented an IRS transcript to
corroborate his claim. He had a $125 credit for the tax year 2010, which was applied to
the balance. (EX 6)
As to SOR 1.q, for past-due tax (2010) in the amount of $4,081.05 to the IRS,
Applicant has been on a tax payment program for several years. He presented an IRS
transcript. At this time, the balance is zero. In fact, there is a credit of $125.07 which
was applied to his 2009 federal tax debt. (EX 7)
Applicant states that he regrets disputing the debts that he did not believe he
owed. He noted that he was stubborn about not paying them if he did not agree with the
debt. He understands that was stupid. He emphasized that of the $16,186 for the 17
delinquent debts, he has either paid, settled, or successfully disputed the accounts. The
reasons for the accumulation of debt are due to unemployment, his wife’s illness, her
loss of income, a lower pay rate for him when he became employed, and using credit
cards to pay for living expenses. He prioritized and supported his family. His latest
credit bureau report reflects that he “pays as agreed” on accounts. His earlier reports
reflect that he disputed certain accounts. The medical accounts have been resolved. He
admits that he was not as timely as he should have been, but always made the tax
payments. He estimates that between 2008 and 2013, he successfully paid about
$80,000 in debt. He was advised to file bankruptcy, but chose not to take that option.
He wanted to pay what he owed. 
He elaborated that the financial hardship that occurred over the past years were
his first issues. He has held a security clearance for 30 years. He is retired from the
U.S. Air Force. He is keenly aware of the importance of background investigations. He
regrets some poor decisions but has learned lessons. He has no criminal, alcohol, or
security issues.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of
trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
6
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish delinquent debts and
past-due federal taxes. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying
conditions ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant experienced unemployment for one year. His wife became ill several
times, and he lost her income. He does not make excuses, but explains that his financial
situation was beyond his control. When he became employed, it was at a lower rate of
pay. He has subsequently had promotions and raises, and he has addressed his debts.
He had numerous medical debts from his wife’s illness, and he challenged them
successfully. He addressed his federal tax issues immediately and agreed to payment
plans. He has paid his tax debt for 2010 and only owes $32 for tax year 2009. He is
steadily employed and has shown his resolve to address and pay his financial
obligations. AG ¶ 20 (a), (b), (d), and (e) apply.
7
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors. I
have noted Applicant’s encounter with financial difficulties after losing his employment
for a year, coupled with his wife’s illness, medical bills, her loss of income and becoming
employed at a lower rate of pay.
 
Applicant is 50 years old.  He served in the U.S. Air Force and retired in 2004,
receiving an honorable discharge. He has worked for his current employer since 2007.
He is married and has three children. He admitted his delinquent debts and recognizes
his mistakes. He chose not to file for bankruptcy, although advised to do so. He has a
track record of honoring his financial obligations. He has mitigated the security concerns
under the financial considerations guideline.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
9
