 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03978 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 10, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
19, 2016, scheduling the hearing for October 5, 2016. The hearing was postponed and 
convened as rescheduled on November 15, 2016. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
 
2 
 
5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A, B, D-F, H-K, and M-S, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcripts (Tr.) on November 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 2001 until he was discharged with a general under 
honorable conditions discharge in 2004. Except for a three-month period of 
unemployment after his discharge, Applicant has worked consistently for defense 
contractors since 2004. He seeks to retain a security clearance. He attended college for 
a period, but he has not earned a degree. He married in 2001 and divorced in 2005. He 
married again in 2014. He has two children with his wife, three other children, and a 
stepchild.1 
 
Applicant has had financial problems for years. He filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
case in 2005, and his debts were discharged in 2006. He accumulated additional 
delinquent debts after the bankruptcy, and he did not file his 2012 and 2013 federal 
income tax returns when they were due. He attributed the bankruptcy to his divorce, and 
his more recent financial problems to the costs associated with a large family living on 
one income.2 
  
The SOR alleges the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case (SOR ¶ 1.c); Applicant’s failure 
to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a); and 13 
miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling about $9,645 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.p).3 Applicant 
admitted owing the 13 delinquent debts at one time, but he established that 11 of the 
debts were paid or settled in March 2016. He was attempting to make payment 
arrangements for the last 2 debts.4 
 
Applicant reported his delinquent debts on his June 2014 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86). When he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in September 2014, he stated that he was on a five-year payment plan 
with the IRS for his 2008 taxes. The payments were being garnished from his paycheck. 
He stated that he did not file his 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns because he 
did not have the money to pay a tax preparer. He stated that he planned to file his tax 
returns by November 2014, and if he owed money, he would set up another payment 
plan.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21, 23-30, 59; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-22, 30-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 5. 
 
3 There is no evidence to support SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
4 Tr. at 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-6; AE D-F, H-K, and M-P. 
 
5 GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant filed his 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns in April 2015. His 
December 2015 pay statement showed that the IRS levied $2,922 from his wages 
during 2015. Paperwork from his January 2016 installment agreement with the IRS 
indicated that his monthly payment is $311, which is levied from his paycheck. The 
agreement showed that he owed $17,246 in taxes, penalties, and interest for tax years 
2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014. Applicant stated that he owes the IRS about $2,000 for tax 
year 2015.6 He stated that the amount was added to another installment agreement.7 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling. He does not believe that he will owe 
the IRS for tax year 2016. He stated that he is committed to paying his taxes and 
keeping his finances in order.8 
 
Applicant submitted letters attesting to his excellent job performance. He is 
praised for his work ethic, dependability, trustworthiness, honesty, loyalty, reliability, and 
integrity.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
6 The SOR only alleged that Applicant did not file tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013. It did not allege 
delinquent federal taxes. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application 
of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
7 Tr. at 32-45, 53-54, 57; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, B. 
 
8 Tr. at 22, 38, 42, 49-52, 55-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE S. 
 
9 AE Q, R. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. He did not 
file his 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns when they were due. The above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence to support SOR ¶ 1.b. That allegation is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy resulted from his divorce. SOR ¶ 1.c is 
mitigated. He attributed his more recent financial problems to the costs associated with 
a large family living on one income. He established that 11 of the 13 delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR were paid or settled in March 2016. He was attempting to make 
payment arrangements for the last 2 debts. Those 13 debts are mitigated. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to file his tax returns when they were due is more problematic. 
“Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with 
well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules 
and systems is essential for protecting classified information.” See ISCR Case No. 14-
04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). Applicant filed his 2012 and 2013 federal income 
tax returns in April 2015, and he has had installment agreements with the IRS for 
several years. However, his tax issues are not under control. In January 2016, he owed 
$17,246 in taxes, penalties, and interest for tax years 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014; and 
he admitted that he owes the IRS about $2,000 for tax year 2015. Applicant’s failure to 
file his tax returns when they were due is not fully mitigated under any of the mitigating 
conditions. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, his steady employment with a defense 
contractor, and his favorable character evidence. However, his ongoing tax issues raise 
doubts about his judgment, trustworthiness, and willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.p:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
