1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  REDACTED  )   ISCR Case No. 15-02182 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant defaulted on his student loans and on some consumer credit accounts. 
Periods of unemployment, two divorces, and medical costs have compromised his 
finances, but he has not made any progress toward addressing his delinquent accounts 
despite his consistent employment since September 2013. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 24, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was 
unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security 
clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On November 11, 2015, Applicant, who was then represented by counsel, answered 
the SOR allegations and requested a decision based on the written record without a 
hearing. Applicant subsequently requested a hearing (Tr. 10), and on March 9, 2016, the 
case was assigned to a DOHA administrative judge to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On April 20, 2016, the case was transferred to me, and on May 19, 
2016, I scheduled a hearing for June 14, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Applicant appeared pro se, having terminated 
his legal representation sometime before the hearing was scheduled. Five Government 
exhibits (GEs 1-5) and seven Applicant exhibits (AEs A-G) were admitted into evidence 
without objection.
1 
Applicant and one of his former brothers-in-law testified, as reflected in 
a transcript (Tr.) received on June 21, 2016. I kept the record open after the hearing for two 
weeks for Applicant to submit additional documentation. No documents were received by 
the June 28, 2016 deadline, so the record closed on that date. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline F that, as of September 24, 2015, Applicant owed 
student loan collection debt totaling $26,298 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e); $4,478 for a 
repossessed vehicle (SOR ¶ 1.d); a $2,722 charged-off balance for furniture (SOR ¶ 1.f) 
four debts totaling $4,043 with a collection entity (SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.h, 1.k, and 1.n); a $799 
past-due utility debt (SOR ¶ 1.i); a $441 charged-off debt for telephone services (SOR ¶ 
1.j), a $2,426 judgment from 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.l); and three smaller collection debts of $50 
(SOR ¶ 1.m), $48 (SOR ¶ 1.o), and $205 (SOR ¶ 1.p). Applicant answered the SOR with 
the assistance of then retained legal counsel. Applicant denied each of the allegations 
based on lack of knowledge about the debts, although he also indicated that he would pay 
validated debts. He maintained that the judgment debt in SOR ¶ 1.l is a duplicate listing of 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f. He also indicated that his ex-spouse was held responsible in their 
divorce decree for the repossessed vehicle debt in SOR ¶ 1.d and the utility debt in SOR ¶ 
1.i. 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and twice divorced. (GE 1; AE A.) He has a nine-year-old 
son from his first marriage, which ended in 2008. Applicant testified that his child support 
payment of $280 every two weeks was withdrawn directly from his paycheck. (Tr. 59-60.) 
Applicant has worked on defense contracts on and off since approximately May 2002 with 
various employers, including some temporary staffing agencies. He was granted a DOD 
secret clearance in February 2006 for his then duties as an electronics technician. (GE 1.) 
He was hired for his current defense project in August or September 2013. (AE G; Tr. 41.) 
As of June 2016, Applicant worked out of his home except when he was required to be 
onsite. (Tr. 32.) 
                                                 
1 
Applicant exhibits A through G were originally submitted with Applicant’s answer to the SOR. I did not review 
them before the hearing. 
3 
 
 
 Applicant worked as a front desk clerk for a motel from April 1997 to April 1998 
when he started working in the restaurant industry, initially as a line cook. From May 2002 
to January 2003, Applicant held a temporary full-time job at a military base before 
becoming employed as a contract computer electronics technician working on Department 
of Defense and Department of Homeland Security projects from January 2003 to July 
2008. Applicant held a DOD secret clearance for his duties (AE C), and his work in 
credentialing was recognized by his employer and its client DOD contracting firm. (AE F.) 
He earned his associate’s degree in applied science (computer and information science) in 
June 2007. (GE 1; AEs D, E.) From November 2008 to August 2010, Applicant was 
employed outside the continental United States updating prison security systems for a local 
government contractor. (AE D.) 
 
 On his return to the United States around September 2010, Applicant collected 
unemployment and worked on-call shifts, about one or two days a week as a cook at a 
mental health center. (AE D; Tr. 38-39.) In December 2010, he obtained a contract position 
as a field support technician for a defense contractor. (AE D.) While in that position, on 
April 28, 2011, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86). He disclosed no delinquent debts or other financial 
issues of potential security concern. (GE 1.) 
 
 As of May 6, 2011, Applicant had several adverse credit entries on his credit record, 
including a $2,426 judgment from April 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.l, same debt as SOR ¶ 1.f), which 
was for furniture acquired in March 2007 during his first marriage and kept by his ex-wife 
on their divorce. (Tr. 45, 50-51.) In May 2010, the collection entity identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.c and 1.e had acquired four student loans obtained for $16,679 (GE 5) that by May 2011 
had increased to $21,192. Several collection debts were reported as outstanding:  a 
medical debt of $50 from 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.m); an electric utility debt of $747 from 2010 
(SOR ¶ 1.n); a $441 wireless telephone debt from 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.j); credit card debts of 
$322 (SOR ¶ 1.k)
2
, $1,427 (SOR ¶ 1.d), and $1,579 (SOR ¶ 1.g), and two smaller debts of 
$48 (SOR ¶ 1.o) and $205 (SOR ¶ 1.p). Another six student loans totaling $20,127 were in 
deferred status continuing to accrue interest (GE 2), but Applicant subsequently defaulted 
on those loans as well. (GE 3.) 
  
 Applicant spent June 2011 installing computers for a federal government official. He 
was then unemployed until December 2011, when a staffing agency placed him in a 
contract position providing onsite computer support for a film manufacturer. After the 
contract ended in February 2012, he was unemployed until June 2012, when the same 
staffing company placed him in a contract position with a state court. He remained in that 
position until August 2012. (AE D; Tr. 40.) After collecting unemployment around $163 per 
week for six months (Tr. 67), Applicant was contacted about his present project. He was 
hired by his current employer in September 2013, when the company took over the project. 
(Tr. 41.) 
 
                                                 
2 
The $289 alleged in the SOR was the high credit on the account, which had a balance of $322 as of April 
2011. (GE 2.) 
4 
 
 In September 2012, Applicant and his new life partner jointly obtained a car loan of 
$11,049 (SOR ¶ 1.d). (GE 3.) They married in 2013. (AEs C. G.) The car loan was repaid 
on time at $299 per month through May 2014. (GE 3.) Applicant’s partner obtained a 
restraining order against Applicant and then filed for divorce in 2014. Applicant could not 
return to the house and so rented a place at $1,350 per month, which included utilities, but 
he had to pay a $1,350 security deposit in addition to his rent. The landlord agreed to 
accept the security deposit in installments. (Tr. 57-59.) 
 
 Applicant’s partner failed to appear at a hearing on his petition held in October 2014. 
Applicant appeared and advised the presiding judge that there was only one bill 
outstanding in his partner’s name, which was for electric utility services (SOR ¶ 1.i). (Tr. 
43.) Applicant agreed to assume repayment for all other bills jointly incurred. In the divorce 
decree, Applicant’s ex-partner was awarded the car purchased with the vehicle loan in 
SOR ¶ 1.d, and he was held fully responsible for the car payments. He was also held 
responsible for the outstanding utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.i). Applicant kept the older model 
vehicle that he had been driving, and he was held responsible for all the other bills. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant’s ex-partner did not make the car payments, and the vehicle was 
involuntarily repossessed in late 2014, leaving a deficiency balance of $4,478 on the loan. 
As of January 2015, the creditor in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e reportedly held delinquent 
student loan debts totaling $26,298. A private student loan lender had filed claims with the 
government for another $20,127 in defaulted student loans. The furniture debt from his first 
marriage was still on his credit record as past due in the amount of $2,722 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 
1.l, same debt). Applicant had made no progress toward resolving the credit card collection 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 1.k, or the wireless telephone debt in SOR ¶ 1.j. The electric 
utility debt (SOR ¶ 1.l), for which his ex-partner is legally liable, was on Applicant’s record 
as a collection debt for $799. Applicant was also past due $59 on a credit card account 
opened in March 2014. Applicant was making timely payments of $25 a month on two 
other credit card accounts opened in August 2014 that had balances of $264 and $260. 
(GE 4.)  
 
  After Applicant received the SOR, he retained legal counsel. (Tr. 47.) Applicant 
completed a personal financial statement on October 13, 2015, showing monthly net 
discretionary income of $257 after paying his monthly expense, including rent of $1,350 per 
month, and debt payments totaling $475. Applicant indicated that he was repaying a car 
loan in SOR ¶ 1.d at $400 a month and $25 each on three other credit card accounts.
3
 
Applicant reported zero assets. (AE B.) At the advice of his then attorney, Applicant asked 
his creditors to verify his debts. He had received no response from the collection entity 
holding his student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e), or from the collection entities pursuing 
him for the credit card delinquencies in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 1.k or the debt in SOR ¶ 1.p. 
The telephone provider in SOR ¶ 1.j asked for his social security number, which he refuses 
to provide. (Tr. 43-44, 46.) Applicant contacted the furniture retailer in SOR ¶ 1.f and gave 
                                                 
3 
Applicant’s credit report does not show a car loan apart from the loan obtained jointly with his ex-partner. (GE 
5.) Applicant testified that his vehicle will be paid off in January 2017 (Tr. 62), so he may well be paying on a 
debt not listed on his credit report. 
5 
 
the creditor the address of his ex-wife for the furniture before the creditor filed for a 
judgment. (Tr. 45, 50-51.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit report of December 16, 2015, showed no payments toward the car 
loan from which his ex-spouse was held responsible. Applicant has not informed his 
creditors that he is not responsible for the car loan deficiency or the electric utility debts 
after his divorce. (Tr. 48.) Applicant had fallen behind 30 days in November 2015 on a 
credit card account opened in July 2015, but he paid $365 to bring his account current in 
December 2015. The delinquent debts in SOR 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.l 
(duplicated in SOR ¶ 1.f) were still outstanding. His credit card accounts opened in August 
2014 were $57 and $62 past due. He owed balances of $357 and $391 on credit limits of 
$300. The collection entity holding the student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e reported 
balances totaling $23,386 on those accounts as well as an additional $39,802 in defaulted 
student loans that it acquired in June 2012 (not alleged in SOR).
4
 Applicant was reportedly 
$1,992 in arrears in his child support (GE 5), although he testified to his belief that he was 
current in his child support as of June 2016. (Tr. 71.) 
 
 Due to the contract nature of his work, Applicant did not have medical insurance 
coverage before September 2013. Over the years, he accumulated substantial medical 
debt, which he estimated at between $30,000 and $40,000, which remains outstanding. 
(Tr. 41-42.) Most of Applicant’s medical expenses incurred from 2015 to 2016 have been 
covered by insurance, although his co-payments are about $100 a month just for his 
medication. (Tr. 65.) For the past two years, his copayments have averaged $130 to $250 
per month when accounting for medical visits. (Tr. 66, 75.) He also incurred a $1,500 
copayment for diagnostic testing that he has not paid. (Tr. 52-53.) 
 
 Applicant owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) between $1,300 and $1,400 for 
tax year 2015. (Tr. 70, 73.) He had not entered into an installment agreement with the IRS 
as of June 2016 because the state was recouping from him $1,100 in unemployment 
compensation at $100 per month. (Tr. 74.) Applicant’s income tax refund for 2014 was 
intercepted and applied to child support arrearage. (Tr. 71.) He had fallen in arrears on his 
child support when he was unemployed. (Tr. 72.) 
 
 Applicant lives with his ex-partner’s two brothers. The younger of Applicant’s two 
former brothers-in-law (hereafter Mr. X) moved in with Applicant and his ex-partner in July 
2013. (AE G.) Mr. X left around December 2013, but he returned in July 2014, bringing his 
older brother, who was about to be evicted and needed a place to live. (Tr. 81-82.) The two 
brothers stayed with Applicant after the dissolution of their brother’s and Applicant’s 
marriage. Applicant pays the rent. Mr. X pays for the Internet, for cable services through 
Play Station, for the house telephone, and for his own cell phone, car insurance, and food 
from his social security disability income and state assistance. (Tr. 79-80.) Mr. X pays all of 
his older brother’s expenses. Although age 32 as of June 2016, his older brother has never 
worked. He has medical problems and was “babied” by their mother and grandmother. (Tr. 
                                                 
4 
Applicant testified that he was going to track down his federal student loans because they had been sold to 
different companies. He had a hardship deferment in the past, but after his request for another deferment was 
denied, Applicant “just left it like that.” (Tr. 63.) It is unclear which debts are federal loans. 
6 
 
80-81.) Mr. X described Applicant as an outstanding person committed to his work. (Tr. 83-
84.) Mr. X does not discuss Applicant’s financial issues with him. He knows that he pays 
the rent, his medical bills, and his car payment. (Tr. 84-85.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledges his financial problems, but he disputes the nexus between 
financial difficulties and his professionalism or capability to perform his duties. (AE C; Tr. 
92.) In that regard, he presented positive character references from two military Chiefs and 
from the project manager for the project on which Applicant has been a technician since 
August 2013. The military personnel are familiar with Applicant’s work performance through 
weekly telephone communications and hours of personal contact with Applicant since 
August 2013 and February 2014, respectively. They have observed nothing of security 
concern about Applicant’s behavior. Applicant earned their “utmost confidence in his 
trustworthiness, professionalism, work ethic, and moral judgment.” They attested that 
Applicant is recognized by the security department as a subject matter expert and is 
considered an “irreplaceable asset” to the team. (AE G.) 
 
 The project manager had nearly daily interaction with Applicant since the project 
began. Applicant has exercised technical skill as well as diligence and professionalism in 
carrying out his duties to the expressed satisfaction of the prime contractor and their 
military customer. Applicant has demonstrated to the project manager a willingness to do 
what is necessary to complete his job. Expense reports filed by Applicant were accurate 
with very minor and easily correctable discrepancies. The project manager expressed an 
awareness of the issues surrounding Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, although he 
did not elaborate as to the nature of the issues. He indicated that he had “high confidence” 
in Applicant holding security clearance eligibility, and that their employer was “very much 
interested” in retaining Applicant in his current position. (AE G.) 
 
 Two individuals who have known Applicant since 2012 through close mutual friends, 
including Mr. X, have found Applicant to be reliable and dependable as well as honest and 
patriotic. An environmental inspector also provided a reference for Applicant. This 
individual held high-level security clearances when he was in the military and described 
himself as “a former professional observer.” In his experience, Applicant was dedicated to 
his job “in the extreme.” (AE G.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
7 
 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 The adverse credit information alleged in the SOR is reflected in one or more of 
Applicant’s credit reports. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that a credit report is 
sufficient to meet the government’s burden of producing evidence of delinquency. See 
ISCR Case No. 14-03612 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015). Applicant presented credible evidence 
8 
 
from his second divorce showing his ex-partner was assigned repayment responsibility for 
the car loan debt in SOR ¶ 1.d and the utility services debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. However, 
Applicant’s claim that the furniture debt (SOR ¶ 1.f) is his first wife’s responsibility is 
uncorroborated and insufficient to disprove his liability for the judgment awarded the 
creditor (SOR ¶ 1.l). The outstanding judgment debt (SOR ¶ 1.l), the defaulted student 
loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e), the credit card accounts in collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.g-1.h and 
1.k), the outstanding telephone and utility delinquencies (SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.n), the past-due 
medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.m), and the collection debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.p for consumer 
items, establish two disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant’s financial problems are more extensive than 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant defaulted on six additional student loans with balances that 
had reportedly accrued to $39,802 as of December 2015. He owes the IRS between 
$1,300 and $1,400 for tax year 2015. His income tax refund for 2014 was intercepted and 
applied to child support arrearage. He was behind $1,992 in his child support as of 
December 2015, although he testified to his belief that he was current as of June 2016. 
Debts not alleged cannot provide a basis for disqualification, but they also cannot be 
ignored when assessing mitigation, including whether Applicant’s financial situation is likely 
to improve to no longer present an unacceptable security concern.
5
 
  
 Concerning mitigation of Applicant’s delinquent debts, AG ¶ 20(a), “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” cannot reasonably apply. Applicant has made no 
payments toward his delinquencies, and it is unclear when he will be in a position to do so. 
Applicant was not in a position financially to make payments as of June 2016, in part 
because he was paying $100 a month to the state for an unemployment compensation 
overpayment. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” is partially applicable. Applicant had periods of unemployment in 
the past, including for over six months from the fall of 2012 into 2013. Ongoing medical 
copayments continue to stress his finances. Applicant pays $100 a month toward his 
medications. His copayments have been as high as $250 during those months where he 
has medical appointments. Even if Applicant’s financial problems arose in whole or in part 
to circumstances outside of his control, I may still consider whether Applicant has since 
                                                 
5 
The DOHA Appeal Board has long held that the administrative judge may consider non-alleged conduct to 
assess an applicant’s credibility; to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; to decide 
whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or to provide evidence for a whole-
person analysis under Section 6.3 of the Directive. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006); ISCR Case No. 09-07219 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012). Applicant’s additional student loan delinquency and 
his income tax debt cannot provide a separate basis for disqualification because they were not alleged, but 
they are relevant to assessing Applicant’s financial judgment generally and issues of mitigation. 
9 
 
acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties. See e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan 12, 2007). AG ¶ 20(b) requires that an applicant 
act responsibly to address his debts, and in that regard, Applicant’s evidence falls short in 
some aspects.  After a student loan lender denied an additional hardship deferment, he 
made no effort to pay his student loans. He continues to ignore a court judgment for the 
furniture. He has not complied with a request for information from the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.j, 
apparently because he does not want to submit his personal identification by mail, but 
there is also no evidence that he has contacted the creditor to determine whether he could 
provide the information by more secure means. He has not resolved a $50 medical 
collection debt, despite a reported monthly discretionary income of $257 per month. 
Applicant testified to some recent medical problems, but they have not been enough to 
distract him from his work.  
 
 To the extent that AG ¶ 20(b) is applicable, it does not eliminate the financial burden 
of Applicant’s delinquent debt or the financial judgment concerns that arise from his failure 
to remain current on recently opened accounts. As of December 2015, he was past due on 
two low-limit ($300) credit card accounts opened in August 2014. While child support and 
repayments to the state for excess unemployment compensation have understandably 
been given priority, Applicant has also not been sufficiently proactive toward addressing 
the debts of concern to the DOD.  Neither AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control,” nor AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable in that the car loan in SOR ¶ 1.d and the utility debt in SOR 
¶ 1.i are the responsibility of his ex-partner. AG ¶ 20(e) also applies in that the furniture 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is a duplicate listing of the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.l and does not represent 
an additional delinquency. As for the judgment debt, Applicant did not produce 
documentation needed for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e), which provides: 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off each debt in the SOR, or 
even that the first debts paid be those in the SOR.
6
 However, there must be adequate 
                                                 
6 The DOHA Appeal Board stated in ISCR Case No. 07-06482, decided on May 21, 2008, in part: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of 
“‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). 
However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate[s] that he has “. . . 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The 
10 
 
assurances that his financial problems are not likely to persist. Applicant’s personal 
financial statement showed that he had about $257 available at the end of each month as 
of October 2015, after paying $130 in monthly medical expenses and $400 toward a car 
loan. It is unclear whether the $257 includes his $100 payment to the state for the 
unemployment compensation. Moreover, Applicant’s medical payments have exceeded the 
$130 he estimated for monthly medical care. Applicant testified in June 2016 that he was 
not then in a position to address his past-due debts in any meaningful way. However, his 
car would be paid off in January 2017, which, according to his personal financial statement, 
would free up $400 monthly. Applicant’s history of disregard of his repayment obligations, 
including for some federal student loans, and evidence of recent delinquency on credit card 
accounts, provides little confidence that he can be counted on to manage his finances 
responsibly. The financial considerations security concerns are not adequately mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).
7
 The analysis under Guideline F is incorporated in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The contract nature of Applicant’s work, especially before his present employment, 
left him vulnerable to job loss when contracts were discontinued and liable for medical 
costs because of no insurance. However, Applicant has been consistently employed since 
August or September 2013. He had 2.5 years or so to investigate and verify his debts, 
including his student loans, and to attempt settlements or repayment arrangements. Even 
the two smallest debts of approximately $50 each remain unpaid. His commitment to his 
work for the DOD is unassailable, but it does not justify his inattention to some debts, 
                                                                                                                                                             
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his 
actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr.4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that 
the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the 
SOR. 
 
7 
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
11 
 
including his student loans. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on a 
reasonable and careful evaluation of the evidence to determine if a nexus exists between 
established facts and a legitimate security concern. For the reasons already noted, 
concerns persist about Applicant’s present financial stability to where I am unable to 
conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security 
clearance eligibility for him.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
