 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 15-01589 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 14, 2013, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 24, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 12, 2015. He answered 
the SOR in writing on November 3, 3015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 2, 
2016, and I received the case assignment on March 21, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on August 4, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 23, 
 
2 
 
 
2016. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified and had no exhibits to submit. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 31, 2016. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 The SOR alleges in Subparagraph 2.a that Applicant failed to disclose on his e-
QIP the debts in Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f; 1.h through 1.p; 1.r; 1.t through 1.ee; 
1.gg; 1.ii through 1.h.h.h; 1.j.j.j through 1.m.m.m; and 1.s.s.s through 1.j.j.j.j.. However, 
SOR Paragraph 1 ends with an allegation in Subparagraph 1.h.h.h.h. Therefore, no 
findings are made on alleged falsification of the debts identified in Subparagraphs 
1.i.i.i.i. and 1.j.j.j.j in Subparagraph 2.a.  
 
 Furthermore, Subparagraph 2.a. alleges Applicant did not disclose his debts in 
Section 26 of his e-QIP. This statement assumes he made 10 disclosures of delinquent 
debts. However, an examination of Section 26 of the e-QIP does not disclose any 
admissions of any delinquent debts anywhere in the document. Therefore, the 
Subparagraph 2.a. allegation should read as follows, starting on the fourth line from the 
bottom of the allegation: “whereas in truth, you deliberately failed to disclose that 
information as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j.j.j.j.” and striking the previous 
language of the allegation.  These changes are made to reflect the information in the e-
QIP upon my action pursuant to Enclosure 3 of the Directive, Paragraph E3.1.17. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the financial allegations in 
Paragraph 1. He denied the falsification issues in Paragraph 2. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He has an adopted teenage child and is not married. 
His girlfriend has three children. He works for a security company as a guard at a 
defense contractor. He has had several jobs since his 18th birthday. His 2013 
investigative background report shows he quits his jobs because of conflicts with his 
supervisors, often not giving the standard two weeks of notice. (Tr. 19, 21, 22; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has 86 delinquent debts listed in the SOR in Paragraph 1. They total 
$48,893. Four debts are non-medical debts, two being owed to a credit union for auto 
loans since 2008, and two being for cellular telephone service. The remaining 82 
delinquent debts are medical debts incurred from at least 2010 when Applicant went to 
hospital emergency rooms for treatment of any health problem because he did not have 
a primary care physician or medical insurance. Applicant admits these debts and that 
they pertain only to his medical treatment. He has not resolved any of the delinquent 
debts. (Tr. 24, 29-47; Exhibits 1-6) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has not contacted any creditor in several years. He admitted he has a 
tendency to forget to pay debts. His girlfriend takes care of the household money. He 
does not answer the telephone if he does not recognize the calling number, so he has 
not had contact with any debt collector. He does not budget his income and has no 
savings account. He has not had any financial counseling. (Tr. 23, 24, 29-47; Exhibits 1-
6) 
 
 Applicant testified he did not mean to answer the e-QIP Section 26 questions 
about his debts untruthfully. He stated he was unaware of any debts when he entered 
his answers on the e-QIP. To the government investigator a month later after submitting 
his e-QIP Applicant admitted he knew he owed money because he had a repossessed 
automobile and a garnishment of his salary in 2011. Applicant signed the e-QIP, 
attesting to the truth and completeness of his answers. He denied on the e-QIP having 
any delinquent debts. Applicant claims someone in his company may have changed his 
answers. Applicant stated it took almost a year to submit his e-QIP and it was 
intimidating for him. (Tr. 49-52; Exhibit 1) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $48,893 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. Applicant has 86 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The evidence 
raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No conditions apply:   
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted  responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant is not paying his debts. He has not taken any action to attempt to 
resolve any of the debts. He repeatedly incurred medical debts and not paid any of the 
82 medical financial obligations. His actions are current and not beyond his control. He 
has no basis to dispute the debts. There is no affluence from any source involved with 
Applicant.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant knew he had unpaid auto loans and medical debts for treatments he 
received at hospital emergency rooms when he completed his e-QIP in February 2013. 
He deliberately failed to disclose them in answering the questions in Section 26 of the e-
QIP. This disqualifying condition is established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
7 
 
 
 All the information he should have divulged about his 86 delinquent debts were 
known to Applicant when he answered the e-QIP. He tries to claim someone else 
changed his answers in Section 26, but does not have any evidence as to who might 
have done it. He has not produced any document showing his answers were truthful 
before he signed the e-QIP. Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his 86 delinquent 
debts when he signed the e-QIP.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant voluntarily sought 
treatment for medical conditions knowing he did not have medical insurance or the 
financial means with which to pay for such treatment. He has not changed his behavior 
over the term of 82 medical debts. He falsified his information given to the government 
about these finances, making him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. His testimony about not having medical insurance or any savings shows his 
behavior will continue. He incurs debts and then reneges on paying them.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
and personal conduct.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h.h.h.h.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
