 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-00268  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the financial 
considerations and alcohol consumption guidelines. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 30, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On December 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 21, 2016 (Answer), and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
(Item 1.) On February 23, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on said date, and received by him on March 6, 2016. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit any additional information or file objections to the 
Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on December 13, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations contained in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR, 
and included explanations to those alleged in ¶ 1.a and ¶ 1.b. (Item 1.) His admissions 
are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and unmarried. He earned a General Education 
Development certificate in 2006 and a technical certification in 2013. Since 2014 he has 
worked for a federal contractor. Prior to this position he was unemployed for six months. 
Between 2011 and 2013 he was unemployed for almost two years, and between 2007 
and 2008 he was unemployed for about a year. (Item 2.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from December 2014 and May 2014, the 
SOR alleged ten delinquent debts, which totaled $7,900, and included a delinquent 
mortgage. The debts became delinquent between 2012 and 2014. (Items 4, 5.) He 
disclosed some of the debts in his SF-86. Applicant said that he co-signed a mortgage 
with his sister-in-law for her house, and that she did not pay it (¶ 1.a). (Items 1, 2.) 
Applicant did not provide evidence documenting the resolution of that debt or any other 
alleged debt.  
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol problems beginning at the age of 16, when he 
began consuming alcohol to excess at times and continued for the next 16 years. He 
admitted that at times he consumed 24 beers a week. In February 2010, he voluntarily 
entered an alcohol treatment program. He remained in the program until April 2010. 
According to his SF-86, he disclosed his treatment, and he stated that he completed the 
program. However, during his personal interview, he stated that he believes he left 
without completing the program because he had to return to work. He admitted that he 
was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He continued consuming alcohol to excess 
through June 2014. (Items 1, 2, 3.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
 
 
3 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
4 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. From 2012 to 2014, he accumulated 
10 delinquent accounts totaling over $7,900, which he has been unable or unwilling to 
pay or resolve. The evidence establishes the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts 
the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant failed to produce evidence that he addressed any of the ten delinquent 
accounts. He provided evidence that some delinquencies may have been caused by 
periods of unemployment prior to starting his current position in 2014, which may have 
been conditions beyond his control; but he failed to submit documentation indicating 
that he acted responsibly under those circumstances. He presented no evidence of 
financial counseling. He offered no evidence from which to establish a track record of 
debt resolution. There are no clear indications that his financial problems are under 
control or are being resolved in good faith. Accordingly, the record is insufficient to 
establish mitigation under any of the foregoing conditions.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he consumed alcohol in excess and to the point of 
intoxication between the ages of 16 and 32. In 2010 he voluntarily entered an alcohol 
treatment program and was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. The evidence raises a 
security concern under AG ¶ 22(c). Applicant admitted that after leaving the treatment 
program he continued to consume alcohol, sometimes to excess. The facts are unclear 
as to whether he completed the treatment program; hence there is insufficient evidence 
to raise a security concern under AG ¶ 22 (f).  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
 
6 
 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
  
Applicant’s excessive consumption of alcohol was not infrequent and continued 
from at least 1998 to 2014, about 16 years. Applicant acknowledged his alcohol abuse, 
but did not provide evidence that he has established a pattern of abstinence or 
responsible use. He did not submit evidence that he is participating in any form of 
treatment, is making satisfactory progress in addressing his problem, or that he has not 
relapsed. There is no evidence that he has received a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified mental health provider. There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation 
under any of the above conditions.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns set 
out in the SOR. He disclosed in his SF-86 some delinquent debts, and his history of 
alcohol abuse. His SOR-listed delinquent debts arose between 2012 and 2014, and 
remain unresolved despite employment with a Federal contractor since 2014. He has 
not established a track record of managing his debts. He provided no evidence of the 
status of his alcohol consumption. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with sufficient 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and present eligibility for a security 
clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guidelines for financial considerations and alcohol consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:         AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
