 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05086 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 14, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 20, 2016, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 23, 2016. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified, but did not offer any exhibits at the hearing.  The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant did not submit any 
additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 31, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. These admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since 2011. He has an associate’s degree. He retired from the Air Force 
after 22 years of honorable service in the pay grade of E-7 (master sergeant). He is 
married, pending a divorce, and has four children. He held a security clearance during 
his Air Force career without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts in the approximate amount of $11,826 
and a 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The debts were listed in a credit report from January 
October 2014, and he admitted them in his personal subject interview (PSI) to an 
investigator in October 2014.2  
 
 During his PSI, Applicant attributed his bankruptcy to poor financial decisions and 
living beyond his means. He reaffirmed this explanation during his testimony. 
Concerning the later seven SOR debts, Applicant stated they were incurred during a 
period of unemployment in 2011, also when he was receiving a lower wage for his post-
military job, and due to his wife’s inability to work because of her illness. He claimed to 
have hired a debt relief service (DRS) to address his debts. He did not provide 
documentation to show the terms of the DRS’s duties and obligations. He was provided 
an opportunity to produce documentation about the DRS post-hearing, but he did not do 
so. He admitted that he had not addressed any of the SOR debts outside of hiring the 
DRS. All the SOR debts remain unresolved.3    
 
 Applicant stated that concerning his current finances he is “treading water.” He is 
one payment behind on his mortgage. He has a retirement account with a balance of 
about $14,000. He recently began a second job to help his finances.4 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 18-19, 21; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 22-23, 26-28, 31, 40, 47. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-30, 22-23, 26-28, 31. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant has seven delinquent debts and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple, and his inaction on the debts shows a 
lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
5 
 
Applicant presented evidence to show that his financial difficulties were beyond 
his control. He claimed to have hired a DRS to address his debts, but he did not provide 
evidence of his relationship with a DRS. He failed to provide evidence that he is 
addressing his debts. Overall, the record evidence does not support that Applicant’s 
actions were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant claimed to hire a DRS. Given the unpaid status of all the debts, 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Evidence of good-faith efforts to 
pay or resolve the debts is lacking. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies and ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, his federal contractor service, and the 
circumstances by which he became indebted. However, I also considered that he has 
made little effort to resolve his financial situation. He has not established a meaningful 
track record of debt management, which causes me to question his ability to resolve his 
debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
