 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-00065 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant admitted having shared marijuana with friends twice during 2011 after he 
was granted a security clearance in 2005. He has two casual friends who are citizens of 
NATO countries. Resulting security concerns were fully mitigated. Based on a review of 
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 14, 2014. On July 
30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on September 10, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on April 14, 2016. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 13, 2016, 
setting the hearing date for June 1, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection, and testified on 
his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 8, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has worked 
since shortly after he earned a Ph.D. degree in physics in August 2009. He has held a 
permanent security clearance since February 2005, in connection with his work on DoD 
projects during his post-graduate education and current employment. He has never 
married and has no children. (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 7-8.) 
 
Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations set forth in SOR, which were based 
on his disclosure of that information in GE 1. (AR.) Applicant=s admissions, and 
accompanying explanations, are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
Applicant shared a marijuana cigarette with friends on two occasions, in July and 
September 2011, before they attended events for rare vinyl record collectors. These 
events were held on a monthly basis, and Applicant attended them on a fairly regular 
basis between 2009 and 2014. Other than those two occasions in 2011, he declined to 
participate when they offered to share their marijuana with him. He offered no justification 
or excuse for his marijuana use, other than momentary bad judgment in succumbing to 
peer pressure. After the second incident, he realized that he did not want to be a casual 
drug abuser and decided that he would never abuse drugs again. He no longer attends 
those record collector events, and has not abused marijuana since September 2011. 
Although his clearance remained in effect, he was not working on any classified projects 
during that period in 2011. Applicant signed a statement of intent to never use marijuana 
again, with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. His hearing testimony, 
concerning his resolve not to abuse drugs in the future, was forthright and credible. (GE 1; 
AR; AE A; Tr. 27-28, 32-35.) 
 
Applicant worked at a NATO facility in 2008 while completing his Ph.D. 
requirements. While there, he befriended a Belgian meteorologist and an Italian 
mathematician who worked at the same facility. He has remained in touch with them on a 
casual basis via social media, and has visited each of them in person once or twice, in the 
years since they worked together during 2008. Neither of these individuals works in their 
respective country’s defense or intelligence sectors. (GE 1; AR; Tr. 28-30, 35-41.)  
 
 
      
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, A[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: A[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG & 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG & 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The DCs raised by the evidence in this case are:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
Applicant admittedly used marijuana that was passed around by a group of his 
friends on two occasions in July and September 2011. He had been granted a security 
clearance in 2005 that remained in effect, although he was not working on any classified 
projects at the time. These facts support application of the foregoing DCs, shifting the 
burden to Applicant to prove mitigation of resulting security concerns. 
 
AG & 26 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. The facts  
in this case support application of two of them: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
Applicant=s abuse of marijuana was casual and occasional, in social settings with 
friends who were partaking. He voluntarily chose to stop such activity when he realized 
that it was inconsistent with his goals and standards of behavior, and his use was 
 
 
5 
 
 
removed in time and place from any work-related security concerns. His honest 
admission of this error in judgment is the only evidence that it took place, and supports the 
credibility of his declared intention not to repeat such conduct. The drug abuse ended 
more than five years ago, and there is compelling evidence that drug abuse is unlikely to 
recur. Substantial mitigation under AG & 26(a) was accordingly established. 
 
Applicant is employed full time in a demanding professional position. He no longer 
engages in the recreational activities where peer pressure to use drugs might exist. He 
has been abstinent since September 2011, and offered a signed statement of intent not to 
abuse drugs in the future. He also testified credibly concerning his regret about past drug 
abuse and intentions not to repeat it. These facts establish further strong mitigation under 
AG & 26(b). 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The SOR allegations and evidence in this case raised potential security 
concerns under one foreign influence DC: 
  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
Applicant maintains casual social contact with two foreign citizens, from Belgium 
and Italy, whom he met while working at a NATO facility in 2008 when they were all 
graduate students. One is a meteorologist and the other is a mathematician. Neither of 
them work in the defense or intelligence sectors of their respective governments. I find 
that Applicant=s relationship with these citizens of NATO allies does not create any 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, coercion, or 
influence under AG & 7(a).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Those that 
clearly provide conclusive mitigation of any theoretical security concerns in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a sincere and 
mature individual, with a consistent professional history of dedicated and loyal service to 
the United States. He has accepted accountability for his bad judgment in minor 
marijuana use on two occasions more than five years ago, and convincingly expressed 
his resolve to avoid similar conduct in the future. His actions have substantially eliminated 
 
 
7 
 
 
the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress, and make continuation or recurrence of 
security concerns unlikely. His minimal contacts with two casual friends from NATO 
countries create no potential for pressure or exploitation. Overall, the record evidence 
creates no doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
