 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05850 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 In 2010 and 2014, Applicant was convicted of operating a vehicle while intoxicated 
(OWI). He attended alcohol-related classes, and he currently drinks alcohol responsibly. 
There is no diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence. He committed to not driving after 
consuming alcohol and intends to maintain complete sobriety. Alcohol consumption 
security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
February 25, 2015. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) on February 8, 2016, issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption).1 Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2016, and requested a 
decision based on the written record. 
 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
The Government prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) on April 11, 2016. 
Applicant received the FORM on April 18, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the 
concerns. Applicant timely responded to the FORM on May 18, 2016, and he submitted 
a one-page statement and a statement from his substance abuse counselor. The case 
was assigned to me on January 17, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted both allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He 
also submitted explanations and provided comments in mitigation and extenuation. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has never 
married, and he does not have any children. He graduated from high school in 2005, and 
received a bachelor’s degree in 2009. Applicant started working for a federal contractor 
shortly after his college graduation in 2009, and he was hired by his current employer, a 
federal contractor, in June 2011.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2015 SCA that his 2011 application for a security 
clearance was denied. He needed the clearance to qualify for his U.S. Coast Guard 
merchant marine credentials. Applicant believed his clearance was denied because he 
failed to disclose in his 2011 SCA that he was convicted of operating a vehicle while 
intoxicated (OWI) in 2010. Applicant explained that he did not disclose the 2010 OWI 
conviction because the record had been expunged and he believed that the conviction no 
longer existed and there was no need for him to disclose it.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2015 SCA that he was convicted of operating a vehicle 
while intoxicated in both 2010 and 2014. Applicant admitted he did not make any changes 
in his alcohol consumption habits after his first OWI in 2010. He suffered little financial, 
work related, legal, or personal repercussions and he went back to his old habits. His 
second arrest for OWI opened his eyes because of the adverse legal and financial 
consequences: his driver’s license was suspended, his car was damaged, his clearance 
was denied and he lost work opportunities, and he had to pay legal fees. 
 
Applicant started consuming alcoholic beverages at age 16 with friends over the 
weekends. He drank to intoxication every time he consumed alcoholic beverages up until 
July 2014. Applicant claimed that after his 2014 OWI arrest he reduced his alcohol 
consumption, and now he drinks alcohol once or twice a week. He also reduced the 
magnitude of his alcohol consumption. He avoids situations where he might be tempted 
to drive after consuming alcohol. He has not driven after consuming alcohol after his 2014 
OWI. He is not alcohol dependent. Applicant claimed he now consumes alcohol 
responsibly and does not drink to intoxication. He is remorseful for his DUIs. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that after receipt of the SOR, he went 
back to his substance abuse counselor for a reevaluation. The counselor deemed 
Applicant was at a low risk of becoming alcohol dependent. Notwithstanding, Applicant 
 
3 
                                         
 
decided there was no sense in taking any risks with consuming alcohol and decided to 
follow the path of complete sobriety.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
 
4 
                                         
 
  Two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant admitted and the evidence establishes that in 2010 and 2014, he was 
convicted for OWI. His alcohol consumption established that he engaged in binge-alcohol 
consumption to the extent of impaired judgment.2 AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are established 
by the evidence.  
 
Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and 
is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
                                            
2Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted definition 
of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The definition of 
binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) National 
Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA Newsletter 3 
(Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/winter2004/ Newsletter 
Number3.pdf. 
 
5 
                                         
 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶ 23(a) applies. Applicant was convicted twice for OWI in both 2010 and 2014. 
After his 2014 OWI conviction, Applicant consumed alcoholic beverages more 
responsibly. Following his receipt of the SOR, Applicant contacted his substance abuse 
counselor for a reevaluation. The counselor stated Applicant has been consuming alcohol 
responsibly since 2014. He also indicated Applicant’s intent to maintain complete 
sobriety. The counselor stated Applicant “does not fall into a category of problematic or 
alcohol dependent use of alcohol.” (Response to the FORM, Counselor’s May 18, 2016 
letter). 
 
Applicant is committed to not driving after consuming alcohol, and an OWI is 
unlikely to recur because of this change in circumstances. Applicant is now more mature. 
He has reduced the frequency and magnitude of his alcohol consumption. He has 
demonstrated remorse for his OWIs and has taken responsibility for his past misconduct. 
 
Applicant attended and successfully completed alcohol-related classes. He did not 
receive a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence. Applicant has eliminated doubts 
about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Alcohol consumption 
security concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. (AG 
¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
6 
                                         
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
federal contractors since 2009. In 2010 and 2014, Applicant committed OWIs, which are 
misdemeanor-level criminal offenses. He attended alcohol-related classes, and after 
2014, he consumed alcohol responsibly. He reduced the frequency and magnitude of his 
alcohol consumption. There is no diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence. He has not 
had any alcohol-related incidents involving the police and courts since 2014. He 
expressed remorse about his OWIs, and he committed to not driving after consuming 
alcohol. Applicant has established his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I believe such incidents are unlikely to recur. Alcohol consumption security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
