 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06359 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 6, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 17, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 8, 2016. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant’s counsel objected to GE 2, and it was not 
admitted. GE 1 was admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and three 
witnesses testified. He offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 16, 2016.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about India. Applicant did not object, and I have 
taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported by 
source documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He was born in India. He completed college in India 
and immigrated to the United States in 1997. He married his wife in India in 2000 and 
she immigrated to the United States the same year. They have two children; ages 
eleven and three, both born in the U.S. Applicant and his wife became U.S. citizens in 
2009. His wife is college educated and has a career. Applicant works as a contractor for 
the U.S. military. He holds a public trust clearance.1  
 
 Applicant and his wife hold “person of Indian origin” (PIO) cards. This card is 
issued to people of Indian origin who are no longer citizens of India. It is used in lieu of a 
tourist visa that is required to enter India. It does not provide the holder with any special 
privileges other than noted.2  
 
 Applicant’s father, mother, and brother are citizens and residents of India. His 
father retired from the Indian railway in 2002. He receives a modest government 
pension. His contact with the Indian government is the same as an ordinary citizen. His 
mother is a housewife and has never worked outside of the home. Applicant’s brother is 
college educated and works as an organic farmer. They all live in a small remote town 
in the southern region of India. Applicant and his family travel to India to visit their family 
about every two years. Their last visit was in 2016. Applicant speaks to his parents on 
the phone about once a week, so that his children can have contact with their 
grandparents. His parents have visited Applicant and his family in the United States 
about three to four times, but it is unlikely they will visit in the future due to their age. 
                                                          
1 Tr. 9, 40-41, 65, 68, 82-87; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 54-56, 64, 75. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant speaks to his brother about once a month. His conversations with his family 
relate to general health and well-being topics.3  
 
 Applicant’s wife’s father is a citizen and resident of India. Her mother is deceased 
and her father remarried. Applicant’s wife visits her father when they travel to India. She 
has no relationship with her stepmother. Her father visited Applicant and his wife in the 
United States in 2005 for about a month and has not visited again. They do not 
anticipate he will visit them again. Her father lives in close proximity to Applicant’s 
parents. Applicant’s wife speaks to her father by phone about once a month. Applicant’s 
phone conversations with his father-in-law occur about once every four months. He may 
speak to his wife’s stepmother if they are visiting, but not otherwise. His wife’s father is 
a retired postal worker. He retired in approximately 2002 and receives a modest 
pension from the Indian government. His contact with the Indian government is the 
same as any ordinary citizen.4 
 
 Applicant and his wife own properties in India. In 1989, Applicant’s wife inherited 
agricultural property from her mother that is valued at approximately $20,000. They own 
individually or jointly six other properties in India, including an apartment purchased in 
2014. They do not have plans to develop the properties. The apartment will be used to 
accommodate Applicant and his family when they travel to India. Applicant estimated 
the current total value of all of the properties to be approximately $94,000, but this 
amount could change depending on the market. He testified that they invested in 
property in India because it was an emerging market and thought it would be a good 
investment to fund their children’s future education expenses. They anticipated selling 
the property in the future to fund these expenses. If their foreign property is an issue 
and the U.S. government requested, Applicant would sell the properties. Applicant’s 
wife concurred. Applicant also maintains an Indian bank account opened in 1995 that 
has a balance of a couple hundred dollars that he uses when he travels to India so he 
does not have to carry cash. If it is a security concern he would close it.5  
 
 Applicant’s father has a home in India valued at about $80,000. Applicant does 
not know if he would inherit the property from his father. If he were to inherit it, he would 
contact his security officer and disclose the information. He would sell the property if it 
were a security clearance issue. Applicant testified that he has lived in the United States 
for 20 years and he has no intention of moving back to India. He and his wife do not 
provide any family members financial support.6  
 
 Applicant and his wife own their home in the United States valued at about 
$290,000. There is no mortgage on the property. In Applicant’s personal financial 
                                                          
3 Tr. 60, 71-75, 87, 91. 
 
4 Tr. 42-46, 70-71, 75-76, 87. 
 
5 Tr. 47-59 76, 79, 88-89, 93; Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. 56-57, 76, 79-81, 92. 
 
4 
 
 
statement (PFS), he listed approximately $1.5 million in assets and no liabilities. He 
testified that he and his wife live within their means and have worked hard. They 
participate in family and community activities. They have sufficient assets in the United 
States to fund their children’s future education expenses regardless of the their foreign 
property investments. Applicant would contact his security manager if there was a threat 
to his family or property in India.7  
 
Applicant provided character statements and testimony from coworkers and 
friends. He is described as honest, trustworthy, dependable, respectful, and reliable. He 
exhibits an excellent work ethic, outstanding judgment, and has never violated security 
protocol. He is a dedicated family man. He is loyal to the United States and in the 
opinion of those providing character evidence, they are confident he would contact the 
appropriate authorities if there was ever a threat to him or his family. In addition, 
evidence was provided that Applicant and his family have assimilated into the American 
culture, and they exhibit the same preferences to entertainment, food, and leisure 
activities as their neighbors and friends who were born in the United States. Applicant 
provided a copy of a PFS and a copy of a consolidated credit report reflecting he has an 
excellent credit score.8 
 
India9 
 
 India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. It is a multiparty, 
federal parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of 
approximately 1.1 billion. 
 
 The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability 
permeates the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human 
rights violations go unpunished. A number of violent attacks were committed in recent 
years by separatist and terrorist groups. In addition, a number of terrorist groups 
operate in regions of India that makes travel to these regions dangerous. 
 
 The United States recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought 
to strengthen its relationship with it. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist.  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 76-78, 80-81, 93-94; Answer to the SOR; AE B, C, D.  
 
8 Tr. 16-38; Answer to the SOR; AE A, B, C, D, E. 
 
9 HE I. 
 
5 
 
 
 India has a history of being involved in criminal espionage and is an active 
collector of U.S. economic and proprietary information. India remained on the Office of 
the U.S. Trade Representative’s Priority watch list in 2015, based on its history of 
trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy-including one of the highest rates of video 
piracy in the world, and concerns regarding patents and regulatory data protection. Of 
particular concern is counterfeit pharmaceuticals produced in India and shipped to the 
United States, posing serious risk to Americans consumers. There have been cases 
involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use 
technology to India, including technology and equipment which were determined to 
present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the development of weapons 
of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign government and private entities, 
including intelligence organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-
sector acquisitions of U.S. technology.  
 
 The United States views India as a growing world power with which it shares 
common strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries, 
and they are expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a dynamic and 
collaborative future. The United States and India seek to elevate the strategic 
partnership further to include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense, education, and 
joint democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(d), and 7(e) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low 
standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”10 
 
Applicant’s parents, brother, and father-in-law are citizens and residents of India. 
India’s human rights record, terrorism activities, its history of being involved in criminal 
espionage, and as an active collector of U.S. economic and proprietary information 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion and raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply. Applicant 
and his wife have substantial financial interests in India which create a heightened risk 
of foreign influence or exploitation. I find AG ¶ 7(e) applies.  
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
  
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. India is a 
democracy and has a strong partnership with the United States. However, its human 
rights record and its history of economic espionage raise concerns.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1997, and his wife has lived here 
since 2000. They have been naturalized citizens since 2009. Their children were born in 
the United States. They own their home in the United States. They are loyal to the 
United States. Except for Applicant’s parents, brother, and father-in-law, they do not 
have close ties with any other family members in India. Applicant and his family have 
traveled to India in the past to visit their family. They do not intend to return to India to 
live and likely will not return after their parents pass away. Applicant parents, brother, 
and his father-in-law in India do not have any unusual affiliation with the Indian 
government. His father and father-in-law are retired and receive modest government 
pensions. His brother does not have an affiliation with the Indian government.  
 
Applicant and his wife’s contact with family members in India are unlikely to 
create a risk of foreign exploitation. His father and father-in-law are retired and do not 
hold positions that raise any unusual security concerns or place them in a heightened 
risk scenario. His brother works in agriculture and is not in a high-profile job that might 
be targeted. I find it is unlikely Applicant might be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of his family, including his brother, and his wife’s father in 
 
9 
 
 
India and the interests of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies. Applicant and his 
wife have been in the United States most of their adult lives. Their children were born in 
the United States. They have assimilated into the American culture and have a deep 
sense of loyalty to the United States. I am confident that Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any conflicts in favor of U.S. interests. I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies. AG ¶ 8(c) does 
not apply because Applicant’s relationship with his parents and brother, and his wife’s 
with her father is more than casual and infrequent.  
 
Applicant’s financial interests are not insignificant. He and his wife own seven 
properties in India with an aggregate value of about $94,000. They were inherited or 
purchased over the years for investment purposes to fund their children’s future 
educational expenses. Applicant’s financial interest in India must be balanced with his 
financial footprint in the United States. Applicant and his wife have substantial financial 
interests in the United States. They have approximately $1.5 million in assets, which 
includes ownership of their home. They have no liabilities and live within their means. 
Applicant testified that he would divest himself of the Indian properties if the U.S. 
government requested him to do so. There is no evidence that India targets its citizens 
or U.S. citizens to obtain protected information. Considering the totality of Applicant’s 
finances and facts about India, I find that Applicant’s financial interests in India are 
unlikely to result in a conflict and potentially be used to influence, manipulate, or 
pressure him. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
10 
 
 
Applicant is 46 years and has been a naturalized citizen of the United States 
since 2009. He holds a public trust position. His wife is also a naturalized citizen and his 
children were born in the United States. He has some familial ties and financial interests 
in India, but they are outweighed by his loyalty to the United States. Applicant provided 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised under the foreign influence 
guideline. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence guideline security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
