 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03587 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 19, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications 
and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and detailed 
                                                          
1 Item 5 (e-QIP, dated July 19, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 21, 2015. In a sworn statement, dated 
January 8, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on March 25, 2016, and he was afforded an 
opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, 
Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his 
case. Applicant received the FORM on April 5, 2016. Applicant’s response was due on 
May 5, 2016, but to date, no response has been received. The case was assigned to me 
on December 27, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to drug involvement in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). Applicant’s admissions 
and other comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as an operations supervisor with his current employer since April 2007.3 He attended high 
school for several years but dropped out in June 1997 without graduating. He received 
his General Educational Development (GED) in December 2004.4 He has never served 
in the U.S. military.5 Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in December 
2005.6 He was married in October 2007.7 Applicant has two children, ages 11 and 7.8 
  
                                                          
2 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 8, 2016). 
 
3 Item 5, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
4 Item 5, supra note 1, at 8-9; Item 7 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 15, 2013), at 1. 
 
5 Item 5, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
6 Item 6 (Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS), Joint Adjudication Management System (JAMS), 
Person Summary.  
 
7 Item 5, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
8 Item 4, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement  
 
Applicant is a substance abuser whose choice of substances was identified by 
Applicant as marijuana and various opiates, including Vicodin, Percocet, and heroin. He 
experimented with marijuana as a teenager by taking six or seven “hits” from a marijuana 
cigarette on one occasion in September 1995. He was arrested and charged with 
possession of marijuana. In Juvenile Court, he was placed on probation for nine months. 
After that incident, Applicant never resumed any relationship with marijuana, and he 
expressed no intent to do so.9  
 
Applicant’s subsequent involvement with illegal substances is somewhat 
confusing, for he has offered two separate scenarios of such use. One depicts an 
individual who used opiates recreationally, and the other describes an individual who 
resorted to opiates for pain management following an automobile accident.  
 
The first scenario is as follows: Commencing in February 2009, three years after 
he had been granted a security clearance, and continuing until May 2013, Applicant 
purchased opiates on a regular basis to sustain his daily recreational use of them. It 
reached a point where he needed the opiates to function, and he became sick if he did 
not use them.10  
 
The second scenario is as follows: In 2008, or 2011, Applicant was involved in an 
automobile accident in which he sustained various injuries. His physician prescribed 
Percocet or Vicodin for the pain. Applicant became addicted to the medication, and its 
effectiveness began to wane. When he ran out of his prescription, he resorted to 
purchasing the opiates from unknown individuals, or friends and colleagues who had 
leftover prescriptions for their own use. When the Percocet or Vicodin were unavailable, 
Applicant turned to heroin which he also purchased from unidentified individuals. He 
initially snorted it, but eventually started injecting the heroin. Using the various substances 
made Applicant feel tired, and when he was not on them, he would go through 
withdrawals.11  
 
Applicant eventually came to the realization that he had a substance abuse 
problem. In January 2012, he was admitted into an eight-day inpatient detoxification 
program to wean him off heroin. Because his insurance provider refused to authorize the 
full program, Applicant was forced to involuntarily leave the program after only four days. 
He relapsed. A few weeks later, he again was admitted to the same program, with the 
same results. He again relapsed. During the spring of 2012, Applicant participated in a 
counseling program a few nights per week, but that program was determined not to be 
                                                          
9 Item 7, supra note 4, at 2-3; Item 5, supra note 1, at 27-28. 
 
10 Item 5, supra note 1, at 29-30. 
 
11 Item 7, supra note 4, at 2; Item 4, supra note 2, at 3. During his OPM interview, Applicant indicated the 
accident occurred in 2008, and that he was prescribed Percocet. In his Answer to the SOR, he said that the accident 
occurred in 2011, and that he was prescribed Vicodin.  
 
 
4 
                                      
 
sufficient for his needs.12 In April 2013, Applicant approached a local methadone clinic for 
assistance. He was evaluated and entered into their Methadone Treatment Program to 
wean him off heroin. He received substance abuse counseling and methadone from April 
4, 2013 until December 14, 2014, during which time his methadone was reduced from 
85mgs to 33mgs. He underwent routine weekly drug screens, and while most of them 
reflected negative results, he also had “a couple of positives.”13 There is no particular 
substance identified as being found in the positive tests. Applicant admitted that he was 
diagnosed as opiate dependent.14  His substance abuse counselor in the Methadone 
Treatment Program, a Licensed Chemical Dependency Professional (LCDP), noted that 
Applicant’s progress was good when he left the program in December 2014.15 Although 
Applicant contends that he was successfully weaned off methadone while in the program, 
that contention is not supported by the counselor’s statement that when Applicant left the 
program, he was down to 33mgs of methadone. 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s lead general foreman, general foreman, the operations supervisor (and 
formerly Applicant’s immediate supervisor), coworkers, his union representative, and a 
neighbor/friend, are all effusive in praising Applicant. He has been characterized as 
reliable, hardworking, dependable, honest, loyal, a team player, an exceptional leader, 
exceptionally mature, and trustworthy.16 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”17 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”18   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
                                                          
12 Item 5, supra note 1, at 24-25, 32; Item 4, supra note 2, at 4; Item 7, supra note 4, at 2. 
  
13 Letter, dated January 7, 2016, attached to Item 4. 
 
14 Item 4, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
15 Letter, supra note 13. 
 
16 Character References, various dates, attached to Item 4. 
 
17 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
18 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”19 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.20  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”22 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
                                                          
19 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
22 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in AG 
& 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, 
narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition)”, is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, 
under AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” may raise security 
concerns. In addition, AG ¶ 25(e) may apply where there is an “evaluation of drug abuse 
or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized drug treatment program.” AG ¶ 25(g) may apply where there is “any illegal 
drug use after being granted a security clearance.”  
 
Applicant’s characterization and description of his significant opiate abuse was 
initially as follows: In February 2009, three years after he had been granted a security 
clearance, and continuing until May 2013, Applicant purchased opiates on a regular basis 
to sustain his daily recreational use of them. It reached a point where he needed the 
opiates to function and he became sick if he did not use them. When Percocet or Vicodin 
were unavailable, Applicant turned to heroin which he also purchased from unidentified 
individuals. He initially snorted it, but eventually started injecting the heroin. He eventually 
entered various treatment programs, relapsed, and finally entered a Methadone 
 
7 
                                      
 
Treatment Program where his methadone was reduced when he was discharged from 
the program. During his treatment, he tested positive for unidentified substances on a 
couple of occasions. Applicant was diagnosed as opiate dependent. After he consulted 
with an attorney, the scenario changed somewhat. Instead of characterizing his opiate 
use as recreational, Applicant chose to characterize it as an addiction following an 
automobile accident. The essential facts remain unchanged. Applicant abused opiates 
after he was granted a security clearance, eventually becoming addicted to opiates. AG 
¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), 25(e), and 25(g) have been established.  
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. None of them apply. The Government put its 
trust in Applicant when it granted him a secret security clearance in 2005, and he broke 
that trust when he involved himself in his repeated use of opiates after that date. He went 
from Percocet, to Vicodin, to heroin. Furthermore, while Applicant has repeatedly stated 
a current intention not to use any drugs in the future, he has never submitted a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any future violation.  
Applicant’s purported abstinence is viewed favorably, and he should be 
encouraged to continue it. However, after becoming addicted to opiates, including Heroin, 
the period of Applicant’s purported abstinence, whether it started in May 2013 or 
sometime thereafter when he tested positive for unidentified substances, is still too brief 
to conclude that Applicant will not relapse. Applicant has not furnished a reasonable basis 
for ignoring his fiduciary responsibilities of holding a security clearance and resorting to 
opiate use. He initially claimed it was for recreational reasons, and then changed his 
explanation that it was for pain management and ultimately an addiction. There is no clear 
evidence that Applicant’s use of methadone is completed. Instead, there is evidence that 
his prescription for methadone had merely been reduced. Because of the uncertainty 
established by his various versions of causation, there is continuing doubt as to 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my analysis below.      
 
There is some mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept. Applicant has 
a sterling reputation in the workplace and in his neighborhood. His opiate abuse 
purportedly ceased in May 2013. Applicant’s abstinence is viewed favorably, and he 
should be encouraged to continue it. He supposedly no longer associates with other 
substance abusers. 
 
There is also more substantial evidence supporting the security concerns. 
Applicant used opiates over a multi-year period while possessing a security clearance. 
He knew he was violating both federal law and his fiduciary responsibilities when he 
resorted to purchasing, possessing, and using the opiates, including the heroin, but it 
apparently did not matter for he did so on numerous occasions. There are several 
troubling aspects of this case, including Applicant’s inconsistent versions of the reasons 
for his opiate abuse; the use of non-prescribed Percocet and Vicodin, as well as heroin, 
remains a federal criminal violation; and his continued recreational or pain self-
management use of those opiates after being granted a security clearance. While 
Applicant now intends to refrain from such use in the future, based on his track record, it 
is difficult to give that vow much weight.  
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record 
evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.23 Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with some questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. (See AG && 
2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and supporting 
evidence, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
failed to mitigate or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
                                                          
23 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
