 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04559 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant sufficiently mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 29, 2016, and he elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 18, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on April 20, 2016. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant provided a response to the FORM, which was received by the Government on 
or about May 9, 2016.  The case was assigned to me on December 5, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5. FORM Items 1 
and 2, consisting of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR, are pleadings and 
are entered into the administrative record. I admitted the Government Exhibits, identified 
as FORM Items 3-5, into evidence without objection.   
 
 In his FORM response, Applicant submitted a letter, a summary of medical 
appointments, an IRS payment history, and two collection accounts repayment 
histories, which are admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-D.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He has been married since 1991, and he has two 
children, ages 19 and 24, who live with him and his wife. From 1983 to 1986, Applicant 
served in the U.S. Army. From 1986 to 2004, he served in the National Guard, from 
which he received an honorable discharge.1   
 
 From 2004 to April 2013, Applicant was employed as a civilian with the 
Department of Army. He was unemployed from April to August 2013. Since August 
2013, he has been employed as a federal contractor.2   
 
 The SOR alleges three consumer debts (¶¶ 1.a., 1.f., and 1.g.), four medical 
collection accounts (¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e.), and two federal tax debts (¶¶ 1.h. and 
1.i.). In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the alleged debts, and he 
provided documentation demonstrating that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.e. were 
paid or settled.3 The Government, in its FORM, conceded that these five debts had 
been settled or paid.4 In his FORM response, Applicant explained that he did not make 
any payments on the debt in 1.a., however, he received and filed a 1099-C to resolve 
this debt.5 Given Applicant’s documentation and the Government’s concession, I find 
that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. was resolved through the filing of the 1099-C and that 
Applicant paid the four medical collection accounts (¶¶ 1.b. – 1.e.). 
 
 The two remaining consumer debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.g.) were placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $3,092 and $3,942, respectively. Applicant’s 
FORM response includes a payment history showing 47 bi-weekly payments (totaling 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
2 Item 3. 
3 Item 2 at 1, 3-8. 
4 Government’s FORM at 2.  Although the Government’s FORM concedes resolution of the debts alleged 
in “1.a., 1.b., 1.c., and 1.d.” the context of the paragraph, taken with the documentation cited, indicates 
that the Government was referencing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. -1.e. 
5 AE A. 
 
3 
 
$5,875) from November 2013 through March 2016 and satisfying the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f.6 
Although the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. has accrued interest, Applicant’s bi-weekly payments 
will continue to apply towards this remaining debt.7     
 
 The two federal tax debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.i.) resulted from past due taxes 
from tax years 2009 and 2012, respectively. Applicant’s FORM response lists 17-
monthly payments between November 2014 and March 2016, totaling approximately 
$7,750,8 and both his security clearance application and FORM response state that 
payments began before November 2014.    
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose due to several converging events and 
circumstances. In 2009, Applicant moved to a different state to assist with family 
medical issues, and he transitioned from a permanent government position to a 
temporary government position. In 2013, budget cuts and the sequestration led to the 
end of the temporary position and to Applicant’s four-month period of unemployment. 
Applicant continued to support his wife and children in one state as he moved to a 
lower-paying federal contractor position in another state. He continued to support 
households in two states and was required to often take leave following his wife’s 2011 
cancer diagnosis and subsequent treatment.9   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
6 AE D. 
7 AE A. 
8 AE A; AE C. 
9 AE A; AE B; Item 3 at 16-17. 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges nine debts totaling approximately $22,028. Some of the debts 
date back to about 2010, and three debts remain delinquent. Accordingly, the evidence 
is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence 
 
5 
 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10 An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government.11 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose from a convergence of circumstances 
beyond his control – his family medical issues, his unemployment/underemployment, 
and maintaining two households. Because he continues to maintain two households, 
because there is no evidence to conclude that unemployment and medical issues are 
unlikely to recur, and because some of the delinquent debts remain, AG¶ 20(a) does 
not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both (1) Applicant’s financial indebtedness 
resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.12 Applicant provided sufficient evidence of circumstances 
beyond his control to fulfill the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not require an applicant to be 
                                                          
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
 
6 
 
debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously.13 
Here, despite facing circumstances beyond his control, Applicant addressed the alleged 
delinquent debts and established a track record of payments since November 2013. He 
has already settled or paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.f., and he has been 
paying on the three remaining accounts. Therefore, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) does 
apply.   
 
There is neither record evidence of credit counseling nor record evidence, such 
as a monthly budget, to conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”14 
Applicant’s voluntary debt repayments predate his submission of his security clearance 
application and the issuance of the SOR. He has established a track record of 
repayments or has taken significant steps towards resolution on all of the alleged 
accounts, thereby demonstrating an overall plan to resolve his delinquent debts. Thus, 
AG ¶ 20(d) does apply.   
 
Given Applicant’s established track record of debt repayments, while 
encountering circumstances beyond his control, I find that Applicant sufficiently 
mitigated the financial considerations concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009)(“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010)(Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant identified and documented the circumstances that contributed to his 
financial indebtedness and his lengthy track record of debt repayments. I conclude that 
he sufficiently mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.i.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
