 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00771 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 19, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
11, 2016, scheduling the hearing for November 17, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) 1, and A through V, which were admitted without objection. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that were 
marked AE W and X and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 1, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. military from 1980 until he retired with an honorable discharge in 2001. 
He has worked for his current employer since May 2016. He worked consistently for 
other defense contractors since 2008. He has an associate’s degree. He is married with 
two children and two stepchildren.1 
 
 Applicant was laid off work in 2008 and was unemployed for several months. His 
daughter has a medical condition, and he was helping his terminally ill mother and his 
elderly father-in-law financially. He had difficulty paying his bills, and he sought the 
advice of a credit counseling company. He followed the company’s advice to stop 
paying his bills, and he let the company address his debts.2  
 
 Applicant had a 401(k) account through the company that laid him off in 2008. He 
did not realize the extent of the tax consequences that resulted when the funds were 
disbursed to him following the lay-off. He did not have the money to pay the additional 
taxes generated by the disbursement.3 
 
The SOR alleges unpaid federal taxes of $23,084 for tax years 2009 and 2014 
(SOR ¶ 1.a); a $195 state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.b); and six miscellaneous delinquent debts 
totaling about $13,758 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.h).4 He admitted owing all the debts at one time 
with the exception of the $490 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant established through 
documentary evidence that he was not responsible for that debt. He paid, settled, or 
otherwise resolved all the remaining debts with the exception of the federal taxes.5 
 
Applicant has been paying the IRS through installment agreements since at least 
2013. However, he fell into a pattern of not paying his current-year taxes and having the 
amount owed added to a new installment agreement. His most recent agreement was 
entered in August 2016 for tax years 2009, 2013, 2014, and 2015 in the amount of 
about $23,000. His monthly payment is $450, which is automatically deducted from his 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14, 26-27, 55-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE B. 
 
2 Tr. at 14-16, 52-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE B. 
 
3 Tr. at 17-19; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B. 
 
4 The SOR allegations were incorrectly numbered (two allegations numbered SOR ¶ 1.c and no SOR ¶ 
1.g). I have corrected the numbering of the allegations to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-42, 50-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE 1, A, F-M. 
 
 
3 
 
paycheck. Applicant realized that he needed to break of cycle of owing back taxes. In 
2016, he increased the amount withheld from his pay by his employer for the current-
year taxes. His accountant completed state and federal projected returns for 2016 that 
estimate he should be entitled to refunds of $6,425 from the IRS and $1,298 from the 
state. The IRS will apply the refund amount to his back taxes.6   
 
Applicant took a credit management course. He credibly stated that he is 
committed to paying his taxes and keeping his finances in order.7   
 
Applicant called three witnesses, and he submitted numerous documents and 
letters attesting to his excellent job performance. He is praised for his dedication, 
reliability, work ethic, dependability, professionalism, loyalty, trustworthiness, patriotism, 
and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 17-26, 29-30, 53-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE ; AE D, E, W, X. 
 
7 Tr. at 17-26, 29-30, 43-44, 47-50, 54. 
 
8 Tr. At 58-72; AE N-V. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable to pay his financial 
obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by unemployment and taking care 
of sick and elderly family members. He paid, settled, or otherwise resolved all of the 
resulting delinquent debts with the exception of his federal taxes. He has been paying 
the IRS through installment agreements since at least 2013. However, he did not make 
significant headway on his back taxes because he was not paying his current-year 
taxes. He broke that pattern in 2016 when he increased the amount withheld from his 
pay by his employer for the current-year taxes. His accountant estimated a $6,425 
refund that would be withheld by the IRS for his back taxes. I am satisfied that 
Applicant’s finances are now in order and that he will continue his efforts to resolve his 
tax issues. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are partially 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered honorable military service, his steady employment with defense 
contractors, and his favorable character evidence. Applicant broke his pattern of not 
paying his current-year taxes when he changed the amount withheld from his pay in 
 
6 
 
2016. He now has a viable plan to address his financial problems, and he has taken 
significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
