 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00809 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 9, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 25, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
26, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 7, 2016. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection.  
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. I held the record open until December 27, 2016, to 
permit Applicant an opportunity to provide additional documents, which he did. He 
provided one document that is marked AE F, and I admitted it without objection.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 15, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to reflect the evidence by 
adding tax years 2014 and 2015. There was no objection and the motion was granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied both allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2005 and has been 
employed with the same company since 2006. He is not married and has no children. 
He completed a security clearance application in November 2014, and was interviewed 
by a government investigator in November 2015.2 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not timely file his 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 
2015 Federal income tax returns. He testified that for tax years 2006 to 2011 he filed 
extensions, but was not sure if he complied with the extension requirements.3  
 
 Applicant provided documentation to show on November 19, 2015, he filed his 
2011 Federal income tax return. It appears he was due a refund, but forfeited it. The 
IRS transcript noted that he was sent an inquiry in March 2013 inquiring about the 
unfiled tax return.4  
 
Applicant filed his 2012 Federal income tax return on January 27, 2015. He was 
sent an inquiry by the IRS in December 2013 about his unfiled tax return. He owed 
taxes, penalties, and interest for that tax year. He indicated that other years’ refunds 
were applied to said amount, and he paid the remaining amount in August 2016.5 
                                                          
1 HE I is Department Counsel’s email response stating that she did not object to the AE F. This document 
is an email from Applicant. 
 
2 Tr. 17-20; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. 20-22, 33-34; I have not considered this information for disqualifying purposes, but will consider it in 
my credibility, mitigation, and whole person analyses.  
 
4 Tr. 25-26; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 26-30; AE B. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant filed his 2013 Federal income tax return on November 20, 2015. It is 
unclear if he owed a balance for this year.6 Applicant provided a document that 
indicates he was contacted by the IRS in October 2015 inquiring about his delinquent 
2014 Federal income tax return. He filed the 2014 return on November 19, 2015. 
Applicant testified that he had not filed his 2015 Federal income tax return.7 After the 
hearing, Applicant sent an email stating: “I’ve since met with [my] CPA and filed my 
2015 federal tax return and I’m awaiting a refund.”8 He did not provide supporting 
documents. 
 
Applicant testified that he was aware of his responsibility to timely file his tax 
returns. He admitted he was at fault and procrastinated. He stated he was looking for an 
accountant that had experience with his unique tax issues. He stated he was not trying 
to cheat the government and renege on paying taxes. His employer withholds sufficient 
taxes from his income so he does not owe taxes. He testified that he filed his delinquent 
tax returns in preparation for getting a security clearance. He stated that previously he 
did not timely file his 2015 Federal income tax return because he was still looking for an 
accountant.9  
 
 Applicant disputes the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b ($11,194) as not belonging to him. 
He testified that the name and address in the Government’s evidence is his brother’s. 
He testified that he and his brother’s first five numbers of their Social Security numbers 
are the same. The extract does not include a complete Social Security number. 
Applicant’s November 2014 credit report reflects the judgment. Applicant provided a 
copy of the judgment obtained from the state civil court, and it does not reflect 
Applicant’s first name, but rather that of his brother.10 I find the judgment alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.b does not belong to Applicant.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
6 Tr. 30-31; AE C. 
 
7 Tr. 31-32, 34; AE D. 
 
8 AE F. 
 
9 Tr. 20, 35-36, 50-55. 
 
10 Tr. 36-49; GE 1 3, 4; AE E. 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following is 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (f) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2011 through 2015 Federal income tax returns. 
The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant repeatedly failed to timely file his Federal income tax returns from 2011 
through 2015. He testified that he had not yet filed his 2015 Federal income tax return. 
He provided an email after the hearing stating the return was now filed. There is 
insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶ 20(a) as Applicant’s frequent and ongoing conduct 
did not occur under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and his consistent failure to 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
comply with rules casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant admitted he procrastinated and was at fault when he failed to timely file 
Federal income tax returns. There is insufficient evidence to conclude there were 
conditions beyond his control that prevented him from acting responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant admitted that he began addressing his delinquent tax returns because 
he was pursuing a security clearance. His 2011 through 2014 tax returns have now 
been filed. After his hearing, he provided an email stating he had filed his 2015 Federal 
income tax returns. His delinquent tax returns are now filed and AG ¶ 20(c) applies to 
the extent that they are no longer overdue.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old educated man. He repeatedly failed to file his Federal 
income tax returns from 2011 through 2015. Complying with fundamental civic and legal 
responsibilities is required of those entrusted with our nations secrets. Although being 
on notice that his conduct was a security concern in June 2016, at the time of his 
hearing, he had not yet filed his 2015 Federal income tax return. Applicant’s consistent 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations raise questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
 
7 
 
 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations 
guideline security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
