 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01652 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant served honorably as a U.S. linguist in a dangerous environment for 
more than eight years, and he has made substantial contributions to the national 
security of the United States. His parents, spouse, and children emigrated from 
Afghanistan to the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated, and 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 3) On June 30, 
2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On August 2, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR allegation and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 2) On September 14, 2016, Department Counsel completed the 
file of relevant material (FORM). On October 19, 2016, Applicant was provided a copy 
of the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. On December 3, 2016, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals referred this case for decision. On January 
11, 2016, the case was assigned to me.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Afghanistan. 
(Item 5; I-VI) Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). Applicant did not object to me taking administrative 
notice of the proffered documents, and Department Counsel’s request is granted.    
     
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, and he 
provided explanations and mitigating information. (Item 2) His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f allege he has the following relatives who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan: mother; father; step-mother; brothers; sisters; mother-in-law; 
and father-in-law. (Item 1) SOR ¶ 1.b also alleges Applicant’s father is a retired field 
grade officer who served in the Afghan military. (Item 1) SOR ¶ 1.g alleges Applicant 
provides financial support to his relatives living in Afghanistan. (Item 1)   
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old linguist, who is employed by a government contractor 
in Afghanistan. (Items 2-4) He was born in Afghanistan, and he graduated from high 
school in Afghanistan. (Items 3, 4) In 2008, he received a bachelor’s degree in 
Afghanistan. (Item 3) In 2009, he emigrated from Afghanistan to the United States, and 
in 2014, he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. (Items 3, 4)  
 
In 2005, Applicant married. (Items 3, 4) His spouse and two oldest children were 
born in Afghanistan. (Items 3, 4) His five children were born in 2006, 2008, 2011, 2014, 
and 2015. (Item 3) In 2010, his spouse and two oldest children emigrated from 
Afghanistan to the United States. (Item 4) Applicant lives with his spouse when he is not 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
deployed to Afghanistan, and she is a citizen of Afghanistan. (Item 4) The record does 
not indicate whether she is a permanent resident or a citizen of the United States. The 
SOR does not allege a security concern arising from her Afghan citizenship or the 
status of her U.S. citizenship. His three youngest children were born in the United 
States. (Items 3, 4) Applicant’s spouse and five children live in the United States with 
Applicant’s step brother and parents. (Items 2, 4)  
 
Applicant’s father was born in 1945, and his mother was born in 1966. (Item 2) 
They were born in Afghanistan. (Item 2) When Applicant’s parents lived in Afghanistan, 
he sent them money. (Item 2) He does not send money directly to anyone in 
Afghanistan. (Item 2) He provides financial support to his step brother, who lives in 
Applicant’s residence in the United States. (Item 2) The record does not indicate 
whether or not Applicant’s step brother provides financial support to Applicant’s siblings 
living in Afghanistan. In 2016, Applicant’s parents emigrated from Afghanistan to the 
United States, and they have U.S. permanent residence status. (Item 2) Applicant’s 
father served as a field-grade officer in the Afghan Army; however, he does not receive 
a military pension from Afghanistan. (Items 2, 4) 
 
Applicant has five brothers and five sisters who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. (Item 2) He contacts some of his brothers and sisters living in Afghanistan 
on a weekly basis and sometimes more often. (Item 2) Applicant has a step brother who 
is a U.S. permanent resident, and his step brother lives in Applicant’s residence in the 
United States and cares for Applicant’s family while Applicant is deployed to 
Afghanistan. (Item 2) Applicant communicates with his mother-in-law and father-in-law 
on a monthly basis. (Item 2) Applicant has one brother living in the United States. (Item 
2)    
 
Applicant served as a linguist, translator, linguist consultant, or cultural advisor 
from September 2004 to May 2009, March 2010 to November 2010, December 2011 to 
June 2013, and April 2015 to present for U.S. government contractors mostly for the 
U.S. Army at a forward operating base (FOB) in Afghanistan. (Item 4; FORM at 2) From 
November 2009 to March 2010, and from February 2011 to May 2011, Applicant 
worked as a role player or cultural advisor at a military installation in the United States. 
(Item 4) The Air Force (AF) has advised security officials that Applicant recently 
successfully completed a counterintelligence polygraph examination. (Item 2)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
  Applicant provided character references from four AF master sergeants (MSgt), 
an AF major (MAJ), three AF technical sergeants (TSgt) and an AF lieutenant colonel. 
(Item 2) These AF officers and noncommissioned officers served closely with Applicant 
for extended periods under combat conditions and dangerous circumstances in 2016. 
They described his service in Afghanistan as professional, diligent, honest, and reliable. 
(Item 2) He is enthusiastic, willingly undergoes hardship, and is exceptionally valuable 
for mission accomplishment in a combat environment. (Item 2) The lieutenant colonel is 
his squadron commander, and he described Applicant as clearly “the best of twenty 
interpreters that enable our mission.” Applicant provided two certificates from his 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
employer in 2016 lauding his excellent duty performance in Afghanistan. There is no 
evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, 
or committed any security violations. 
    
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia that is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists, 
the Taliban, and their affiliates continue to seek power and employ intimidation within 
the country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations 
and the Taliban target United States and Afghan interests, installations, and personnel 
by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage 
taking. The risk of terrorist activities remains extremely high. The country’s human-rights 
record remains poor, corruption is widespread, and violence is rampant. According to 
recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks 
and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are 
ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.  
 
The United States’ extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against 
the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan to its citizens and residents 
and Afghan Government problems developing and complying with the rule of law. In 
July 2016, President Obama announced that he would keep 8,400 U.S. service 
members in Afghanistan through January 2017, in an effort to aid Afghanistan in the 
suppression of the Taliban and other terrorist entities. A top national security goal of the 
United States is to establish relationships, cooperation, training, and support of the 
Afghanistan Government and military in the ongoing war against terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant has frequent contact2 with his siblings, mother-in-law, and father-in-law, 
who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His frequent contacts are a manifestation 
of his care and concern for his relatives living in Afghanistan. 
 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Afghanistan because 
of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those dangers on behalf 
of the DOD for more than eight years, and he is willing to do so in the future. Numerous 
Afghan linguists, supporting U.S. forces, have family living in Afghanistan. Thousands of 
U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Afghanistan are 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent).     
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
targets of terrorists or the Taliban, along with Afghan civilians who support the Afghan 
Government and cooperate with coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if 
an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case 
No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001).  
 
Applicant lives with his spouse when he is not deployed to Afghanistan, and she 
is a citizen of Afghanistan. The record does not indicate whether she is a permanent 
resident or a citizen of the United States. The SOR does not allege she is not a citizen 
of the United States. The record lacks evidence of his spouse’s relationships with her 
family who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. There is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. 
See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002). Applicant has ties of affection and obligation to his spouse, and her parents are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. “[A]s a matter of common sense and human 
experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection 
for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case 
No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged is counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United 
States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
  
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationships with relatives living in Afghanistan 
create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists or the Taliban could place 
pressure on his family living in Afghanistan in an effort to cause Applicant to 
compromise classified information. When Applicant is not deployed to Afghanistan, he 
lives with his spouse, who is an Afghan citizen. These relationships create “a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 
7(d). Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with 
family in Afghanistan and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant has frequent contact with his siblings, mother-in-law, 
and father-in-law, who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. A key factor in the AG 
¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S.” Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2009, and he became a U.S. citizen 
in 2014. One of his brothers and his step brother live in the United States. His spouse 
and five children live in the United States, and three of his children were born in the 
United States and are U.S. citizens.   
 
Applicant’s years of support to the DOD in Afghanistan as a linguist and cultural 
advisor, including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards mitigating 
security concerns. Applicant is currently serving in Afghanistan providing critical 
assistance to U.S. Armed Forces in a dangerous combat environment. He has offered 
to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in Afghanistan. He has 
shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States during his more than eight 
years of support to DOD while serving in Afghanistan.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant’s father, a former field-grade Afghan officer who 
is now 76 years old, and his mother are U.S. permanent residents living in Applicant’s 
U.S. residence, and their Afghan citizenship and former residency are no longer of a 
security concern. Nevertheless, Applicant’s relatives currently living in Afghanistan, like 
every other resident of Afghanistan, are at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. 
 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower 
and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in 
Afghanistan. Applicant and his relatives living in Afghanistan are potential targets of 
terrorists and the Taliban, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information 
could theoretically add risk to his relatives living in Afghanistan from lawless elements in 
Afghanistan.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Afghanistan are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, performance of linguist duties in a combat zone, and U.S. citizenship 
are important factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. His connections 
to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence 
security concerns under Guideline B. Foreign influence concerns under Guideline B are 
mitigated. Even if security concerns are not mitigated under Guideline B, they are 
mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.    
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
Applicant has frequent contact with his siblings, mother-in-law, and father-in-law, 
who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His frequent contacts are a manifestation 
of his care and concern for his relatives living in Afghanistan. Those relationships raise 
important foreign influence security concerns, and they must be balanced against his 
connections to the United States. His closest relatives all live in the United States. His 
parents, spouse, five children, step brother, and brother all reside in the United States.    
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2009, and he became a U.S. citizen 
as soon as eligible in 2014. One brother, one step brother, and his parents have 
emigrated from Afghanistan to the United States. Three of his children were born in the 
United States, and they are U.S. citizens. When he became a U.S. citizen, he took an 
oath of allegiance to the United States. There is no evidence that Applicant has 
engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed any security 
violations. 
 
Applicant served as a linguist, translator, linguist consultant, or cultural advisor 
for more than eight years from September 2004 to present in Afghanistan. He worked 
for U.S. government contractors primarily for the U.S. Army at an FOB in Afghanistan. 
Applicant provided character references from nine AF officers and noncommissioned 
officers who served closely with Applicant for extended periods under combat conditions 
and dangerous circumstances in 2016. They described his service in Afghanistan as 
professional, diligent, honest, and reliable. His squadron commander described 
Applicant as clearly “the best of twenty interpreters that enable our mission.” He served 
in a U.S. designated combat zone, and he made contributions to the U.S. military at 
personal risk. He is willing to continue to serve in Afghanistan in support of U.S. Armed 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forces as a linguist, risking his life as part of his duties on behalf of the U.S. combat 
forces in Afghanistan. He is fully aware of the risks to himself. All these circumstances 
increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by 
a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past honorable service as a 
linguist in Afghanistan, desire for continued employment as a translator or cultural 
advisor, and oath of allegiance to the United States document his loyalty, 
trustworthiness, and reliability, and they weigh heavily towards approval of his security 
clearance. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.3 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to threaten 
the Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and 
those who cooperate and assist the United States. The Afghan Government does not 
fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United 
States and Afghan Governments are allies in the war on terrorism.       
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence concerns 
are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
