 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 09-08099 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 29, 2009, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On March 18, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 31, 2011. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On August 28, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
on October 26, 2011. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
November 12, 2011. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on November 13, 2011, 
within the 30 day time allowed that would have expired on December 12, 2011. I 
received the case assignment on May 14, 2012, after the case was reassigned from 
another administrative judge. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Afghanistan. (Item 6) The facts administratively noticed are 
set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.h, and admitted the 
other six allegations. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant is 30 years old and was born in Afghanistan. He immigrated to the 
United States in 2001. He became a U. S. citizen on April 4, 2007. He has a U.S. 
passport. He works for a defense contractor and has since September 2007. Applicant’s 
children were born in the United States in 2002 and 2008. He worked in the hospitality 
industry in the United States until 2007 when he obtained his current type of linguist 
position. He rents his current residence. Applicant obtained a nursing certificate from an 
Afghan school in 1998. (Items 2, 4, 5)  
 
Applicant’s wife is a naturalized United States citizen and lives in the United 
States with Applicant. She was born in Afghanistan and immigrated with her husband. 
She became a U.S. citizen in 2007. (Items 4, 5) 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens of and residents in Afghanistan. They came to 
the United States in 2001 with Applicant, but later returned to Afghanistan. His father is 
a journalist and wanted to work again in that business in his homeland after the Taliban 
was ousted from power in December 2001. (Items 2, 4, 5) 
 
Applicant has two brothers and a sister who were born in Afghanistan and moved 
to the United States when Applicant did. They became U.S. citizens in 2007. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens of Afghanistan and now 
are permanent residents of the United States. They reside at the same address as 
Applicant. (Answer) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant has one brother-in-law, who is a citizen of Afghanistan and lives in 
Tehran, Iran, and works for the state-run media there. Another brother-in-law is a citizen 
of Afghanistan and is a resident of Moscow, Russia. The brother-in-law owns a 
warehouse there and has done so for the past 15 years. Applicant has telephone 
contact with both men on a monthly basis. Iran and Russia have political interests 
inimical to those of the United States. (Items 5 and 6) 
 
 Applicant’s uncle is a citizen of Afghanistan and is a resident of the United 
Kingdom. Applicant’s SF-86 states he contacts his uncle more than 15 times each year 
by e-mail. He stated he recently visited his uncle. (Items 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant’s SF-86 states he contacts his brother-in-law in Russia 8 to 15 times 
each year. His brother-in-law in Iran he contacts by email more than 15 times each 
year. He also listed he visited that brother-in-law. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant’s Answer includes six letters of support and recommendation from 
military members with whom he has served from 2006 to 2010. His Answer also 
includes six Certificates of Appreciation from 2010. The letters of support give Applicant 
very high recommendations, extoling his experience and conscientious service. He is 
described as a gentleman, highly competent and very trustworthy. (Answer)  
 
 Applicant places his loyalty with the United States over Afghanistan, according to 
his Answer and interview with the government investigator. (Items 1, 5) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Afghanistan: In 1919 
the British Empire relinquished control of Afghanistan, which was a neighbor to the 
British-ruled India. Tsarist Russia and Britain had fought for control during the 19th 
Century. Afghanistan is slightly smaller than the State of Texas and is located adjacent 
to Pakistan. The population is 28 million people. The national religion is Moslem. From 
1747 Afghanistan had been a monarchy. The last king ruled from 1933 to 1973. He was 
overthrown by a cousin who had been his Prime Minister. The monarchy was abolished 
in 1973.  
 
 In 1978 the communist political party launched a military coup and overthrew the 
incumbent government. The Afghan president and his family were murdered and a 
communist-style regime installed. The populace did not approve of the communist 
“reforms” of the new government and opposed the regime.  
 
 In December 1979 the Russian Communist government invaded Afghanistan 
after the Afghan government refused to accept advice on how to stabilize the country in 
the face of the growing insurgency. In 1989 the Russians agreed to withdraw their 
armed forces from Afghanistan. After years of turmoil the country sank into anarchy by 
1994. The Taliban, a fundamentalist Islamic movement, occupied the capital city of 
Kabul in 1996 and by 1998 had gained control of 98% of the country. The Taliban 
government gave sanctuary to Al-Qaida, the Osama bin Laden led terrorist group. After 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
the attacks against the United States in September 2001 the U.S. military and anti-
Taliban indigenous factions drove the Taliban government from power in November 
2001.  
 
 Afghanistan suffers from rampant corruption and continued Taliban attacks. The 
United States and its NATO allies have many troops in Afghanistan to assist the current 
elected government in fighting the Taliban. There are human rights issues, including 
extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, violation of privacy rights, 
restrictions on a free press and religious freedom.  
 
 The Taliban finances its operations through criminal networks and narcotics 
cultivation. Money raised from these enterprises allows the Taliban to purchase 
weapons and pay fighters.  
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns the security threat in Afghanistan against all 
U.S. citizens is critical. Travel is unsafe. The Taliban targets humanitarian workers, U.N. 
staff members, Afghan government workers, and employees of non-governmental 
organizations. (Item 6)    
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person” concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant lives with his mother-in-law and father-in-law, who are legal residents 
of the United States but citizens of Afghanistan. His brothers-in-law live in countries 
whose political interests are inimical to those of the United States, one living in Tehran, 
Iran and the other in Moscow, Russia. Applicant speaks with them once a month and 
communicates by email more frequently.  
 
 Applicant’s parents live in Afghanistan and are citizens of that country. He has 
contact with them. All of these contacts and familial relationships raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 7 (a), (b), and (c). 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.1 
 
 Applicant’s brothers-in-law and his parents live in countries that raise a security 
concern. The security situation in Afghanistan is tenuous, according to the U.S. State 
Department. Iran and Russia are opposed to U.S. interests around the world. The 
brother-in-law in Iran works for the state-owned and operated media. Applicant’s 
connection to him could place Applicant in a position to have to choose between that 
relationship and his duty to the United States. Applicant’s parents living in Afghanistan 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
could also cause a conflict of interest if they were pressured to compromise Applicant’s 
situation. Their physical presence creates the potential that their safety could be 
threatened to the point that Applicant would confront a choice between their interest and 
those of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) has no application.  
 
 Applicant does not have deep loyalties to the United States because he has only 
been here for 11 years. He arrived in the United States in 2001. He rents a home. He 
worked in the hospitality industry after coming to the United States. Applicant did not 
provide any information on his assets in the United States or in any other part of the 
world. His children were born in the United States. His parents and parents-in-law came 
to the United States with him. His parents returned to Afghanistan. His wife also 
became a U.S. citizen in 2007. Applicant became a linguist in 2007. He has only worked 
in that business for five years. It is not clearly evident from his statements that he will 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (b) does not apply.  
 
 Contact by Applicant with his relatives in Afghanistan, Iran, and Russia is not 
casual or infrequent so there is a risk of foreign influence. AG ¶ 8 (c) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s “customers” and his co-
workers submitted substantial and glowing statements about his work and loyalty. 
These are persons who have been in service with him and relied on Applicant’s linguist 
talents for their advantage. Applicant is experienced in his job and has had no breaches 
of security regulations during his service according to his letter writers. These factors do 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
not counterbalance the familial connections he has in his country of origin and with his 
brothers-in-law in Iran and Russia. 
 
There is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights abuses in Afghanistan. 
More importantly for security purposes, terrorists hostile to the United States actively 
seek classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could attempt to 
use Applicant’s parents and brothers-in-law to obtain such information. Second, he had 
numerous connections to Afghanistan before he immigrated to the United States in 
2001. Following his birth, he spent his formative years there and received his nursing 
education from a school there. Third, his family members with whom he maintains 
frequent contact, are resident citizens of Afghanistan, or reside in Iran and Russia.  
 
Some mitigating evidence weighs in Applicant’s favor under Guideline B. He is a 
mature person, who has lived in the United States for 11 years, and has been a 
naturalized citizen for five years. His spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizens and resident. 
His two children were born in the United States. He has strong ties to the United States, 
as two brothers and one sister are U. S. citizens and residents. Out of his sense of 
patriotism for the United States in its endeavors in Afghanistan, he worked for the U.S. 
government as a linguist in a dangerous environment an undisclosed number of 
months. He asserted his allegiance to the United States in his Answer.  
 
Applicant did not state in his documents whether he has an interim security 
clearance during his tenure with the U.S. military. While that fact is not normally to be 
considered in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board noted in ISCR Case No. 05-
03846 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006) as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s 
assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report a 
foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
The absence of any information about a current security clearance does not alter 
my evaluation of the total evidence, including my concerns about Applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
connections to his brothers-in-law. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” (AG 
¶ 2 (b)) 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
