                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------                   )   ISCR Case No. 09-02545
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se                
______________
 Amended Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has mitigated criminal conduct, drug involvement, and personal conduct
concerns.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
On November 3, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued,
denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of
defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security clearance review
2
Program (January 2, 1962), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 16, 2011, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 22, 2011, and was scheduled for
hearing on May 9, 2012. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of four  exhibits (GEs 1-4); Applicant relied on one
witness (himself) and six exhibits (AEs A-F). The transcript (Tr.) was received on May
16, 2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with a letter of intent not to use
drugs in the future. There being no objections from Department Counsel, and for good
cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record. The
Government was afforded one day to respond. Applicant did not provide any additional
materials.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested and charged on six
occasions between July 2001 and March 2006 for assorted alcohol and drug-related
offenses. Under Guideline H, Applicant is alleged to have used, purchased, and sold
illegal drugs between 1996 and 2005. And under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly
falsified his security clearance application (e-QIP) of November 14, 2008, by omitting his
drug use, purchases, and sales.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations covering his
arrests, charges, convictions, and drug activities. He denied falsifying his security
clearance application. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 29-year-old technician who installs weapon systems on Navy ships
for a defense contractor. He seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the
SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant  has never married and has no children. (GE 1) He claims no military
service. He earned advanced college credits from accredited local colleges between
August 2001 and June 2002. He earned a diploma in chasis fabrication from a
vocational institution in September 2003.
3
Applicant’s drug history
Applicant was introduced to marijuana in 1996 at the age of 13. (GE 2; Tr. 48-49)
In high school he succumbed to peer pressure, became a daily user of marijuana, and
continued to use the drug until April 2005. (GE 2; Tr. 50) Beginning in 2001, he added
cocaine to the drugs he used and used this drug occasionally until August 2003. (GE 2;
Tr. 58-59)  In June 2005, he began using heroin and used it biweekly on an habitual
basis until March 2006. (GE 2; Tr. 58-59) 
Applicant used his illegal drugs at friends’ houses, generally to make himself feel
better. (GE 2) He purchased the drugs from dealers and friends and occasionally sold
them to friends for their personal use. (Tr. 59)
Between 2001 and 2006, Applicant was arrested six times for drug-related
offenses. (GEs 1-4) In July 2001, he was arrested and charged with possession of
marijuana and disturbing the peace. He pleaded “No Contest” to the possession charge
and was fined. (GE’s 2 and 3) The following year, he was arrested and charged with
possession of marijuana (less than an ounce of marijuana), and disturbing the
peace/loud noises/fighting in public. He pleaded guilty to the disturbing the peace charge
and was fined. (GEs 2 and 3)  
In March 2004, Applicant was cited for a third drug-related offense. He had spent
the night at a friend’s house in another state when police entered the home with a search
warrant.  After finding a bag of marijuana in the middle of the room that belonged to both
Applicant and his friend, police cited Applicant and his friend with marijuana possession.
(GEs 2 and 4) Applicant pleaded guilty to the charge and paid a fine of about $600. (GE
2)  
Applicant was cited for a fourth drug-related offense in October 2004. Specifically,
he was charged with driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol and driving under the
influence of alcohol (DUI), .08 % blood-alcohol content (BAC) or more. (GE’s 2 and 3)
The charges were later amended to include a count of reckless driving. Applicant
pleaded “No Contest” to the reckless driving charge, was fined $1,000, and was granted
summary probation. (GEs 2 and 3) His probation was conditioned on his attending a
three-month alcohol education class, which consisted of 30 meetings over a three-month
period. (GE 2) 
In March 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of a
controlled substance and possession paraphernalia used for narcotics. He was in a
parked car with an unidentified woman when police approached the car and spotted
methamphetamine on his dashboard.  Even though the methamphetamine was not his,
he accepted responsibility for it. (GE 2)  He pleaded guilty. (GE 2) Eight days later, he
was arrested and charged with tampering with electric telephone and cable television
equipment, battery, and acting under the influence of a controlled substance. (GEs 2 and
3; Tr. 56-57) Applicant pleaded guilty to acting under the influence of a controlled
substance and was ordered by the presiding drug court to attend a two-year drug
4
rehabilitation program. His plea bargain was combined with his earlier possession
charges in March 2006, and sentence terms were consolidated. (GE 2) His sentence
term included attendance in a narcotics anonymous (NA) program as a part of his
ordered two years of rehabilitation. (Tr. 63-64)     
Under the drug court’s probation conditions covering his March 2006 arrests,
Applicant entered a substance abuse treatment facility (the facility) in April 2006 for
opiod abuse and cocaine abuse. (GE 2; Tr. 30-31; 66-67) Facility records document that
Applicant regularly participated in this outpatient program for almost two years (April
2006 through March 2008). The program included two phases: a phase one that required
him to attend weekly court sessions, submit to random drug testing seven days a week,
and attend NA or AA meetings at least three time a week. (GE 3 and AE A) Applicant is
credited with successfully completing both phases one and two and continues to play an
active role with the drug court’s alumni group. (AE A; Tr. 31-38).  His continuing efforts
with the facility’s professional staff include guest speaking at community outreach events
where he carries a message of hope and recovery from substance abuse and criminal
activity to attendees. In recognition of his ongoing efforts, Applicant received a very
positive endorsement from the A facility’s program manager and public defender. (AEs A
and B)
Besides successfully completing the facility’s two-year rehabilitation program,
Applicant earned AA chips commemorating his six years of sobriety. (AE F) Applicant
continues to be a participating member of his AA home group and has an AA sponsor
with whom he maintains close contact. (AE C; Tr. 71) He has spoken at many AA group
meetings nationally since 2007 and sponsors many men in his AA program. (AE E)
Since entering the facility’s rehabilitation program, he continues to work his 12-step
program in his AA home group meetings and no longer associates with any of the friends
and contacts associated with his years of drug abuse. (Tr. 59-60, 67-68) He assures he
stopped using illegal drugs in March 2006, and hasn’t resumed his use, purchases, or
sales of illegal drugs since that time. (GE 2; Tr. 66-69) His assurances are well
corroborated and are accepted.
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
Asked to complete a security clearance application (e-QIP) in November 2008,
Applicant answered “no” to question 24(c). This question inquired about illegal purchase,
manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, or sale of any illegal
substance within the past seven years. By  answering “no,”  he omitted his drug sales
between 2001 and 2006. He attributed his omissions to his misunderstanding of the term
sales. (GE 2 and AE E; Tr. 40-43, 59-60) Considering he listed all of his drug use in the
spaces provided in his 2008 e-QIP and shows overall honesty and candor, Applicant’s
explanations are plausible ones.
From the whole person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of his overall honesty, trustworthiness, and understanding of DoD
policy constraints on the use of illegal substances. His positive endorsements from his
5
colleagues and girlfriend who are familiar with his past marijuana involvement reinforce
his discontinuance assurances.  Applicant impresses as being honest and candid about
his past drug use and activities in the statement he gave to the investigator from the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) who interviewed him in December 2008.  When
asked about his prior drug use and purchases he provided detailed explanations without
any apparent prompting. His answers reflect honesty and candor.  
Overall, Applicant’s explanations of misunderstanding of the term sales in the e-
QIP he completed in November 2008 are credible and persuasive considering all of the
circumstances surrounding his answers and his demonstrated overall honesty and
candor about his drug history. Inferences warrant, accordingly, that his omissions of his
drug sales were the result of mistake and misunderstanding. 
Endorsements 
Applicant is well regarded by his site managers (past and present). (AE D; Tr. 34-
46) Uniformly, they characterize him as responsible, level-headed, and reliable. (AE D;
Tr. 34-46) Both site managers credit him with significant company contributions. They
cite his strong working relationships with customers and suppliers when describing his
earned reputation for sound judgment and honesty. (AE D) Both praise Applicant for his
turning his life around into a solid, productive contributor. (AE D)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
6
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  AG ¶ 30.
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations.  AG ¶ 24.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
7
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis
Applicant is a dependable technician for his defense contractor who presents with
a considerable history of drug involvement and drug-related arrests, charges, and
convictions. Principal security issues in this case center on Applicant’s arrest history, his
drug involvement, and his omissions of his drug sales in his 2008 e-QIP.  
Criminal arrest issues
Applicant’s arrests, charges, and convictions are drug-related and cover multiple
offenses over a five-year period spanning 2001 and 2006. Summarized, Applicant was
8
arrested, charged, and convicted of drug-related offenses on six occasions between
2001 and 2006. 
Applicable disqualifying conditions under the criminal conduct guideline include
DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(c),
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecute or convicted.” This disqualifying condition embraces
each of Applicant’s proven drug-related offenses.
Applicant’s criminal conduct concerns that are based on his history of recurrent
arrests, charges, and convictions between 2001 and 2006 are entitled to  mitigation
credit. Applicant has avoided any incidents with law enforcement since his last reported
arrest of March 2006, and demonstrates added growth and maturity in his professional
and personal relationships with his program managers, work colleagues, and AA
sponsor.  
Applicant may rely on MC ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal
behavior happened, or it happened under unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” Applicant’s arrests and convictions are currently aged and are outweighed by
his substantial showing of good judgment and trust demonstrated with his current
employer rehabilitation program. 
 Based on his own rehabilitative efforts to date that include encouraging
contributions to his employer and changes in his personal life, the chances of any
recurrent arrests and charges are remote. Applicant may take advantage of MC ¶ 32(d)
of the criminal conduct guideline, “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement.”
Both from a consideration of the applicable guidelines, and from a whole-person
perspective, Applicant demonstrates he  possesses the strength of overall character,
rehabilitation, and maturity to meet all of the minimum requirements under the criminal
conduct guideline for continued eligibility to hold a security clearance. Based on the
confluence of corrective steps he has taken to date in his rehabilitation program and AA
network, he persuasively demonstrates that he has learned important lessons from his
lapses in judgment and will work earnestly to avoid any recurrent arrest problems with
law enforcement agencies. Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances
developed in the record, favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g of the criminal conduct guideline.  
Because of insufficient proof of Applicant’s deliberate omission of his drug sales in
the e-QIP he completed in November 2008, he mitigates security concerns associated
with his omission of his past sales of illegal drugs. Favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraph 1.h of the criminal conduct guideline.
9
Drug concerns
Over a ten-year period (between 1996 and March 2006), Applicant used assorted
illegal drugs regularly with friends and contacts before permanently discontinuing his
use, purchases, and sales in March 2006. Use, purchases, and sales of illegal drugs,
(inclusive of marijuana) are proscribed by both state law and federal law (see 21 U.S.C.
§ 802, et seq.  
Applicant’s admissions of using illegal drugs raise initial security concerns over
risks of recurrence as well as  judgment issues. On the strength of the evidence
presented, several disqualifying conditions of the Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse
are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”  DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of
drug paraphernalia,” and DC ¶ 25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or
failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.”
While Applicant’s recurrent use of illegal drugs over a ten-year period raises some
questions over the strength of his abstinence commitments, it is not enough to prevent
Applicant’s successful mitigation of the issue. Applicant’s recurrent use of illegal drugs
between 1996 and 2006 has never been resumed since he entered the facility in March
2006 and permanently stopped using illegal drugs.
Applicant has made noticeable gains in his efforts to mitigate his past drug
activities. While his multiple drug activities and arrests covered a considerable period
(over ten years), he committed himself to an intense drug rehabilitation program under
the supervising guidance of the presiding drug court in April 2006, and he has
successfully completed the facility’s two-year program without any slips or relapses.
Applicant may invoke several mitigating conditions under the drug involvement guideline:
specifically, MC ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is disjunctive and
can be applied to Applicant’s situation. Applicant’s demonstrated intent not to abuse
drugs in the future has some application. Available considerations under ¶ 26(b) include
“(3) an appropriate period of abstinence.” 
Since quitting drugs altogether in March 2006, Applicant ceased contact with
persons who use drugs. Accordingly, he may fully invoke MC ¶ 26(b)(1), “disassociation
from drug-using associates and contacts,” and MC ¶ 26(b)(2), “changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs were used,” as well to the merits of his situation. To
Applicant’s credit,  he has exhibited open candor about his polysubstance abuse and his
associations with friends and contacts involved in drug activities.  Applicant’s assurances
that his drug involvement is a thing of the past are entitled to acceptance based on his
displayed sustained abstinence, over an extended six-year period, his active communal
involvement in addressing young people about the dangers of drug abuse, and his very
strong character references from his drug counselors, site managers, and AA sponsor. 
10
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of his overall honesty, trustworthiness, and understanding of DoD
policy constraints on the use of illegal substances. His positive endorsements from his
counselors, work colleagues, and AA sponsor familiar with his drug involvement and
judgment lapses reinforce his discontinuance assurances. 
Considering the record on a whole, at this time there is sufficient credible
seasoning of Applicant’s mitigation efforts to make predictable judgments about
Applicant’s ability to avoid drugs and related activities in the foreseeable future. Taking
into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s drug activities
over a ten-year period, Applicant mitigates security concerns with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.a through 2.k of the drug involvement guideline.
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his omissions of his drug purchases in the e-
QIP he completed in November 2008. By omitting his drug purchases, Applicant failed to
furnish potentially material background information about his drug history that was
needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate his security clearance
application. By answering the questions truthfully, though, he averts any need to
consider the application DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts to any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities.” 
Because Applicant’s answers to his completed e-QIP are considered truthful ones
when made, there is no need either to consider any good-faith corrections in his ensuing
OPM interviews. Summarized, Applicant’s answers to questions posed by the OPM
agent who interviewed him in 2008 were sufficiently reconcilable with his e-QIP answers
to questions inquiring about his prior drug involvement and drug-related arrests to enable
him to avoid any need to make prompt, good faith corrections. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s e-QIP omission, his
explanations, and whole-person considerations, his disclosures are sufficient to enable
him to convincingly refute or mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, are each core policy concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15).
Overall, Applicant’s explanations are persuasive enough to warrant conclusions that the
falsification allegations relative to his completed 2008 e-QIP covering his past drug
purchases are mitigated. 
Also covered under the personal conduct guideline are Applicant’s arrests and
convictions associated with his drug-related offenses, his omissions from his e-QIP,  and
his sales of illegal drugs during the same time frame. While mitigated under the criminal
11
conduct and drug guidelines, these arrests, convictions, omissions, and proven sales
reflect pattern rule violations covered by DC ¶ 16 (a)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule
violations.”  His actions are aged, though, and have not been repeated in the past six
years. Mitigation credit is available to him under MC ¶ 17 (c), “ the offense is so minor, or
so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
Evaluating all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record, Applicant
mitigates security concerns associated with the allegations covered by subparagraphs
1.a through 1.h and 2.j of the SOR, that are incorporated in the personal conduct
guideline. Considered together, his past drug-related arrests and convictions covered by
subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b of the personal conduct guideline are mitigated. Because his
e-QIP omissions covered by subparagraph 3.c of the personal conduct guideline were
not deliberate, they are successfully refuted.  
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):  FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.h:                       For Applicant 
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):           FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a through 2.k: For Applicant
      
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):          FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 3.a through 3.c:            For Applicant 
                     Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
12
