 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06843 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen C. Stokes, Esq. 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
In August 2006, Applicant had a psychotic episode. He received inpatient 
psychiatric treatment and was diagnosed under Axis I with Bipolar Disorder, Mixed with 
Psychotic Features. He was reevaluated on July 5, 2011, and he received the same 
diagnosis. He did not receive follow-up psychiatric treatment or therapy after he was an 
inpatient in August 2006. He was not completely honest and candid to the psychologist 
evaluating him on July 5, 2011. Psychological conditions and personal conduct 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2009, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(GE 1) On October 19, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines I (psychological conditions) 
and E (personal conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On November 15, 2011, DOHA received Applicant’s response to the SOR. On 
January 3, 2012, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on 
Applicant’s case. On January 10, 2012, Applicant’s case was assigned to an 
administrative judge. On January 26, 2012, Applicant’s case was set for hearing on 
February 17, 2012. On March 28, 2012, DOHA transferred Applicant’s case to me. On 
April 17, 2012, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 17, 2012. 
Applicant’s hearing was held on May 17, 2012. Department Counsel offered seven 
exhibits, and Applicant offered 12 exhibits. (Tr. 19-20; 177-178; GE 1-7; AE A-L) (Tr. 19-
20) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-7 and AE A-L. (Tr. 20, 178) On May 
30, 2012, I received the transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b and denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 141; GE 1) He 
is employed in the supervision of the maintenance of Army vehicles. He has been 
employed by the same defense contractor since May of 2007. (Tr. 141) He earned a 
graduate equivalency diploma (GED) in 1977. (Tr. 174) He requires one more semester 
of college to earn an associate’s degree in maintenance and automobile body repairs. 
(Tr. 174-175) He has been married for 30 years. (GE 1) He has five children and three 
grandchildren. (Tr. 150; GE 1) His children are ages 12, 24, 25, 28, and 33. (Tr. 150-
151) He is very close to his wife and children. (Tr. 151) They are a strong support 
system for Applicant. (Tr. 152) 
 
Applicant served 20 years on active duty in the Army, and he retired in 2000. (Tr. 
141-142) His rank at retirement was staff sergeant (E6). (Tr. 153) His military 
occupational specialty (MOS) was 63B, light wheeled vehicle mechanic. (Tr. 143, 153) 
He served in Iraq as a defense contractor from November 2004 to August 2006. (Tr. 
143-144, 153-154)  
 
In July 2006, Applicant was serving in Iraq, when he had a severe case of 
pneumonia, was admitted to a military hospital for at least a month, had difficulty 
breathing, and was placed on an IV. (Tr. 144, 154) He believed that he was supposed to 
drive to Kuwait to see a doctor before being cleared to fly to the United States. Instead, 
he was placed on a flight from Iraq to the United States. (Tr. 145) “[He] was angry 
                                            
1
Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
because he was being sent home on the plane, instead of being detained in Iraq to 
heal.” (GE 5 at 10)2 Applicant could not recall anything that happened on the flight or at 
the airport in the United States. (Tr. 146, 156-157)3 Medical records indicate he made 
an outburst that he had a biological bomb inside him and that he had AIDS. (GE 4 at 1; 
GE 5 at 2)  
 
At the airport, the police questioned Applicant and then took him to a psychiatric 
hospital. (Tr. 147; GE 4) He was placed on various medications, and his body had a 
reaction to the medication. (Tr. 158-159) He was discharged from the hospital after 
three days of inpatient care. (Tr. 147; GE 4) He received a discharge report, which 
indicated a discharge diagnosis of bipolar disorder, mixed with psychotic features. (Tr. 
160, 163-164; GE 4) After being discharged from inpatient care, he consulted a 
physician’s assistant, who told him that if he had another episode he should seek 
medical help. (Tr. 167, 170; AE M)4 He is in Tricare, and his primary care specialist did 
not provide a referral to a mental health specialist. (Tr. 171) He did not receive any 
mental health treatment, tests, or evaluation from the physician’s assistant or anyone 
else (except for Dr. S on July 5, 2011) after he was diagnosed in August 2006 as 
bipolar. (Tr. 167-168, 171-172; GE 3) Applicant stopped taking his medication after 
leaving the hospital, and he did not give the medication an adequate opportunity to 
address his psychiatric issues. (Tr. 66) 
 
Applicant said the psychotic break in August 2006 is the only instance in 
Applicant’s life where he had a psychiatric incident. (Tr. 148) When he was removed 
from his position because of the suspension of his security clearance, he was 
disappointed, but he did not complain or react in a negative fashion. (Tr. 149) He did not 
have any disciplinary actions taken against him in his present employment. (Tr. 149-
150) 
 
When Applicant completed his May 5, 2009 SF-86, he responded to a question 
about employment that in August 2006 he “became ill (sick) in Iraq and was unable to 
[return] back to work.” (GE 1 at 23) He also indicated that he was returned from Iraq 
because of illness, and he was diagnosed with dehydration and pneumonia. (Tr. 160, 
163; GE 1 at 18) In response to the question about mental health counseling, he 
disclosed four days of treatment, and he provided the name of the facility providing the 
mental health treatment. (GE 1 at 44) He said that he did not disclose his diagnosis of 
bipolar disease because he was not told to seek additional treatment, and it was the 
only episode. (Tr. 160-164) He believed his medical problem was actually dehydration 
                                            
2
Applicant claimed that he was not upset with his company for sending him back to the United 
States. (Tr. 155) 
 
3
After viewing the police report, which was not admitted into evidence, Applicant became 
convinced that the outburst resulting in his detention occurred at a U.S. airport and not on an aircraft. (Tr. 
172-173) 
 
4
Applicant’s physician assistant indicated Applicant “has demonstrated stability congnitive (sic) 
and profound insight at this time. His judgment, mood, and affect have been normal. All medical issues 
have been addressed without any hampering from a mental standpoint.” (AE H) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and pneumonia. (Tr. 161) He decided not to go back overseas, and he was unemployed 
for about 10 months before obtaining employment with his current employer. (Tr. 162) 
 
On June 25, 2009, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant, and Applicant told the OPM investigator that he became sick on 
the flight from Iraq to the United States, passed out at the airport, and was checked in 
for observation for four days. (Tr. 165; GE 2 at 4) He said that he was “released [from 
treatment] with no diagnosis.” (Tr. 165-166; GE 2 at 4)5 He did not tell the OPM 
investigator about the bipolar diagnosis because he “didn’t consider [him]self as being, 
you know, diagnosed as bipolar.” (Tr. 167)       
 
Applicant’s diagnosis and treatment August 14-16, 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
 Applicant was admitted for inpatient treatment from August 14, 2006 to August 
16, 2006 for “evaluation of depression and paranoia.” (GE 4 at 1) His medical records 
note, “when he was placed on the plane, he claimed that he had a biological bomb 
inside him and that he has AIDS.” (GE 4 at 1) On admission, he was, “paranoid, quite 
isolative, quite suspicious, unable to provide information, somehow confused and has 
difficulty focusing.” (GE 4 at 1) The discharge diagnosis was: 
 
 Axis I:  Bipolar disorder, mixed with psychotic features. 
 Axis II:  None. 
Axis III: (Not Relevant). 
Axis IV: Moderate. 
Axis V: Global Assessment of Functioning is 25. 
 
(GE 4 at 2) He was described as very depressed, angry, confused, very paranoid and 
suspicious, racing and disorganized thought process, poor concentration, insight poor, 
and not necessarily oriented to time, person, and place. (GE 4 at 3-4) Discharge 
instructions were to “be arranged by family” and to “follow-up with family doctor.” (GE 4 
at 6) He was prescribed various medications to address his diagnosed illness. (GE 4) 
                                            
5
The SOR did not allege that Applicant omitted information about his August 2006 discharge 
diagnosis of bipolar disorder, mixed with psychotic features from his May 5, 2009 SF-86 or that he lied to 
the OPM investigator on June 25, 2009, when he denied knowing his psychiatric discharge diagnosis. 
The SOR did not allege that he failed to disclose information about his 2006 psychiatric discharge 
diagnosis on his SF-86 and to the OPM investigator. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be 
considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for the five above purposes, especially as it 
relates to credibility, and not for any other purpose. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
He was not specifically urged to begin psychiatric counseling or treatment or to follow-
up with a psychiatrist or psychologist.      
 
Evaluation by Dr. S  
 
 On July 5, 2011, Dr. S, a licensed clinical psychologist with 42 years of clinical 
experience and a focus in psychological testing, evaluated Applicant over a three-to-
four hour period. (Tr. 22-23, 26, 95-96; GE 6)6 Dr. S reviewed Applicant’s treatment 
records from Applicant’s 2006 in-patient treatment and his responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, and then she used psychometric tests to validate her impressions from 
Applicant’s interview. (Tr. 26-27; GE 5)  
 
There are some factors that tend to support the absence of significant 
psychological conditions adversely affecting Applicant’s mental status, judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. For example, Applicant’s successful Army career and 
accomplishments supports the absence of diagnosed psychiatric problems; however, 
there are hereditary factors that may be dormant for years, and then surface. (Tr. 72-73) 
The absence of a recurrent episode since 2006 is also significant. (Tr. 94) Even though 
he has had long periods of satisfactory functioning, under stress, he may decompensate 
into a psychotic episode. (Tr. 100) Applicant was employed since 2007 with a Defense 
contractor, and he was in a supervisory role when Dr. S did her evaluation. (Tr. 75-76, 
98) Stable employment and type of employment are significant factors supporting the 
absence of a serious, current psychiatric problem. (Tr. 76-77) Applicant’s 30-year 
marriage and raising five children “weigh[s] heavily” in support of his stability, reliability, 
and trustworthiness and against the diagnosed serious psychiatric problems. (Tr. 92-93) 
 
Applicant completed the Minnesota Multiphasic Personal Inventory 2 (MMPI-2) 
test. (Tr. 26, 30) The validity scale suggested Applicant’s results were valid. (Tr. 31) 
There was peak on the aberrant experiences scale or T scale for bizarre mentation, and 
for paranoid ideations or persecutory-type ideas of reference. (Tr. 35) Bizarre mentation 
“is conceptualizing things in ways that are sometimes, outside of reality, or [an] extreme 
perception of things that are seen differently than . . . the normal population.” (Tr. 39) He 
received a higher than normal score for “delusional dualization, thought intrusions, and 
hallucinations.” (Tr. 36) Part of his personality score indicated some consistency with 
“manipulative, incompetent, dishonesty” and perceptions of unfairness. (Tr. 36) 
Applicant has an elevated hostility scale, which relates to psychologically-based 
physical illnesses. (Tr. 36) His aggressiveness scale was also elevated. (Tr. 37) A 
depression subscale indicated “his depression would be manifested by physical 
malfunctioning, i.e. getting sick.” (Tr. 37) His answers were “very typical of people who 
have a schizotypal personality disorder.” (Tr. 40)  
 
                                            
6
Applicant said that Dr. S spent 30 minutes talking to him, and then she gave him a test. (Tr. 170) 
He contended that Dr. S did not spend sufficient time with him to reach an accurate diagnosis. (Tr. 169-
170) Applicant’s claim of the lack of a thorough evaluation is not credible. Although her evaluation was 
inhibited by Applicant’s evasive and guarded responses to her questions, Dr. S issued an 11-page report 
that thoroughly and credibly described Applicant’s mental evaluation and diagnosis. (GE 5)  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Dr. S diagnosed Applicant as follows: 
 
Axis I: 296.64 Bipolar Disorder, Mixed with Psychotic Features (Tr. 45-46)7 
300.81 Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder8 
300.00 Anxiety Disorder NOS9. 
Axis II: 302.20 Schizotypal Personality Disorder (SOR ¶ 1.a; Tr. 24; GE 5)10.  
 
Dr. S did not believe his 2006 psychotic episode was a medical episode because 
of his scores in the area of bizarre mentation during Dr. S’s evaluation. (Tr. 59) Dr. S 
noted that if Applicant is placed under stress in the future, he may have the same 
reaction again. (Tr. 65) Dr. S opined that all of the factors cited in her 11-page report 
were indications that his mental illness adversely affects his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. (SOR ¶ 1.a; GE 5) Dr. S recommended that he remain in therapy with a 
qualified psychologist or psychiatrist, receive medication, and be reevaluated in several 
years. (Tr. 65, 93-94) The underlying dynamics remain and are untreated. (Tr. 66) 
 
Personal Conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a) 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant was evasive and not forthcoming when Dr. S 
evaluated him concerning details of his August 14-16, 2006 inpatient psychiatric 
hospitalization. Dr. S said that Applicant attributed his mental problems to his medical 
problem (pneumonia) he was suffering from at that time. Dr. S noted inconsistencies in 
Applicant’s responses to her questions. He said he did not have a full, clear memory of 
what occurred on the aircraft. (Tr. 63) He said he had a brief recollection of the 
                                            
7
Bipolar disorder is a mood disorder. (Tr. 47) Manic behavior may be shown by aggressive, 
destructive, and highly active behavior. (Tr. 46) One example would be spending sprees. (Tr. 46) The 
mood swings from manic to depression. (Tr. 46) Psychotic features are indicated when there is a 
psychotic break. (Tr. 46) Bipolar disorder is treated with drugs. (Tr. 48) Bipolar affects a person’s 
judgment and reliability to a “tremendous” degree. (Tr. 48) See American Psychiatric Association, 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) (GE 7).  
 
8
“Undifferentiated” means there are health and wellness concerns without being connected to a 
specific problem. (Tr. 50-51) Health and wellness concerns may affect judgment. (Tr. 51) 
   
9
“NOS” is an acronym for not otherwise specified. (Tr. 51) Applicant is anxious; however, it is not 
connected to any particular phobia. (Tr. 52) Applicant has difficulty sleeping, which may be related to 
anxiety or depression. (Tr. 53)  
 
10
A personality disorder is long term and dysfunctional. (Tr. 54) Applicant is suspicious, and he 
feels other people are disingenuous. (Tr. 55) He has some signs of schizophrenia, as indicated by his 
psychotic episode, but he is not schizophrenic. (Tr. 55, 82) There are times when he may have been 
disconnected from reality. (Tr. 82) His schizotypal personality disorder has a tremendous impact on his 
judgment. (Tr. 55) He is anxious about people trying to manipulate him. (Tr. 101) He commented “that I 
can make people afraid of me, and do, I do that sometimes.” (Tr. 101, 104) (This comment alone does not 
establish the diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder. (Tr. 105-106)) He needs to have things under 
his control; however, when things did not go his way, a psychotic reaction does not automatically occur. 
(Tr. 101-105) Axis III, general medical history, and Axis IV, psychosocial environmental problems, do not 
significantly affect security concerns. (Tr. 56-57) Applicant’s Axis V, global assessment of functioning 
(GAF), at 50, shows that Applicant is not operating at full capacity. (Tr. 57) During his psychotic episode 
in 2006, his GAF score was 25. (Tr. 58; GE 4) 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
occurrence on the aircraft, and then the next thing he remembered was being in the 
hospital. (Tr. 63) Initially, he said he was not informed of the bipolar diagnosis, then 
later, he implied that he was aware of it when he said “I never researched what that 
information (the diagnosis) meant.” (Tr. 63-64; GE 5 at 3) After Dr. S explained the 
diagnosis to Applicant, he said no one explained it like Dr. S did. (Tr. 64; GE 5 at 3) 
Initially, he said he did not have any medical issues, then later, he described medical 
and physical issues. (Tr. 64)  
 
Character evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor is an assistant program manager and has known him 
since August 2009. (Tr. 110, 127) He served in the military for 26 years, including 
service in combat zones, and he retired as a sergeant major. (Tr. 110-111) Applicant 
supervises 30 employees and ensures maintenance on about 3,000 pieces of 
equipment. (Tr. 112) He described Applicant as solution-oriented, analytic, and reliable. 
(Tr. 114-116, 125; AE E) He has excellent interpersonal skills, judgment, and 
performance. (Tr. 116, 121-122, 125-126; AE E) Applicant received an award for his 
exceptional contributions to an important Army inspection. (Tr. 117-119; AE L) When his 
clearance was suspended, his employment was changed so that he could continue to 
work for the contractor without a clearance. (Tr. 120-121, 134-137; AE J, K) The 
absence of a security clearance adversely affects his career. (Tr. 137) Although his 
supervisor is not aware of Applicant’s psychiatric diagnosis, he is aware that Applicant 
had an incident where he was delirious and started screaming at an airport or on an 
aircraft. (Tr. 131-133) He recommends reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. 
(Tr. 126) 
 
Applicant’s 2010 employment evaluation indicated his performance was average 
to excellent, and was consistent with the statements from his friends and colleagues in 
the next paragraph. (AE I) He “exceeded targets for most goals with respect to quality 
and/or quantity and delivered these results on or ahead of schedule. [He demonstrates] 
expected behaviors overall. May require development in some areas.” (AE I at 2) He 
“exceeded or met all goals this year with great results” and received outstanding results 
on inspections. (AE I at 3)  
 
Applicant’s spouse, friends, and colleagues, who have known Applicant for many 
years, described him as compassionate, intelligent, mature, loyal, generous, helpful, 
hardworking, disciplined, diligent, conscientious, trustworthy, dependable, honest, 
organized, efficient, and punctual.11 He has excellent communications skills and the 
ability to work efficiently under stressful conditions. He is a valuable asset to the 
contractor’s workforce. His character statements support reinstatement of his security 
clearance. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
11
The sources of the facts in this paragraph are statements Applicant provided. (AE A-G)  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
   
Psychological Conditions 
 
AG ¶ 27 articulates the security concern relating to psychological conditions: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
 
AG ¶ 28 provides three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior; 
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and  
 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take 
prescribed medication. 
   
AG ¶¶ 28(a), 28(b), and 28(c) apply. Dr. S diagnosed Applicant under Axis I with 
Bi-polar Disorder, Mixed with Psychotic Features, Undifferentiated Somatoform 
Disorder, and Anxiety Disorder NOS. Under Axis II, he was diagnosed with Schizotypal 
Personality Disorder. Her diagnosis of Bi-polar Disorder, Mixed with Psychotic Features, 
was the same as that made in the discharge summary after his August 2006 inpatient 
psychiatric treatment. Applicant’s bizarre mentation and stressful periods increase the 
probability that he may have the same psychotic reaction that he had in August 2006. 
Dr. S opined that all of the factors cited in her 11-page report were indications that his 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
mental illness adversely affects his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Dr. S 
recommended that Applicant remain in therapy with a qualified psychologist or 
psychiatrist, receive medication, and be reevaluated in several years. (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
However, the underlying dynamics remain and are untreated. He is not under the 
treatment of a psychologist or psychiatrist.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that the psychiatric entity providing care to Applicant in August 
2006 recommended that Applicant receive follow-up care from a psychiatrist or his 
primary care physician, and that Applicant failed to “follow-up with a psychiatrist and 
[his] primary care physician.” SOR ¶ 1.b is not substantiated because he does not have 
a primary care physician or “family doctor,” and this psychiatric entity did not 
recommend follow-up with a psychiatrist in the discharge summary. He did follow-up 
with his primary care physician’s assistant, who did not refer him to a psychiatrist or 
psychologist or for further mental health treatment.  
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 29 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation; 
 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one 
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been 
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional 
instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. He is not receiving therapy or treatment. 
He is not compliant with Dr. S’s recommendations. He believes that his psychotic break 
was due to pneumonia and not due to bi-polar Disorder, Mixed with Psychotic Features, 
Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder, and Anxiety Disorder NOS, and Schizotypal 
Personality Disorder. Because of his denial of the accuracy of this diagnosis, he is not in 
treatment. He did not provide an opinion from a psychologist or psychiatrist that his 
condition is under control or in remission, and has a low probability of recurrence or 
exacerbation. 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) applies. On July 5, 2011, Dr. S interviewed Applicant for the purpose 
of providing a security-related evaluation. Dr. S is a competent medical authority. 
Applicant denied knowing about his diagnosis under Axis I of bipolar disorder, mixed 
with psychotic features after his inpatient treatment in August 2006. He received a 
discharge report after his inpatient treatment, which indicated the bipolar diagnosis, and 
he was not truthful to Dr. S about his knowledge of the August 2006 diagnosis.     
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a indicates in part that Applicant’s lack of candor resulted in additional 
testing. This portion of SOR ¶ 2.a is not substantiated under AG ¶ 17(f) because Dr. S 
did not describe any additional testing that was required by his evasive and inconsistent 
answers to her questions.   
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. The allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a that he 
intentionally failed to disclose information about his psychiatric history is substantiated. 
He falsely denied that he was aware of the August 2006 diagnosis of bipolar disorder, 
mixed with psychotic features. His failure to be truthful in this aspect of his evaluation, 
as well as several other inconsistent statements, caused Dr. S to question whether he 
was being fully honest and candid about other aspects of his psychiatric history and 
treatment. For example, he said he had no memory of his statements and conduct 
during his psychotic break in August 2006. An honest, candid description of thoughts, 
feelings and psychiatric history is essential so that a psychologist will be able to provide 
an accurate, reliable diagnosis and prognosis. His intentional deceptive statement 
during Dr. S’s July 5, 2011 interview of Applicant is recent, serious, and not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
comments under Guidelines I and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant served his country as a Soldier from 1988 to 2008. He honorably retired as a 
staff sergeant. He contributed to national defense while on active duty and while 
working for Defense contractors, including service in Iraq. During his years of active 
duty service, he was entrusted with valuable Army equipment, and the lives of Soldiers, 
and he never abused that trust. He is 52 years old, and I am confident that he has the 
maturity to comply with security requirements, when he is not undergoing destabilizing 
stress or undergoing a psychotic break. He is an intelligent person who understands 
security requirements. There is no evidence of security violations, disloyalty, or that he 
would intentionally violate national security. Applicant’s spouse, friends, and colleagues 
described his character and duty performance in very positive terms. He is a valuable 
asset to his company’s workforce. He received two award certificates and a strong 
evaluation in 2010 from his employer. His character statements support reinstatement 
of his security clearance.   
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Dr. S and a psychiatric-treatment facility diagnosed Applicant under Axis I with 
Bi-polar Disorder, Mixed with Psychotic Features. Dr. S also diagnosed him under Axis I 
with Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder and Anxiety Disorder NOS. Under Axis II, 
Dr. S diagnosed him with Schizotypal Personality Disorder. She determined that 
Applicant’s bizarre mentation and stress increase the probability that he may have a 
psychotic reaction similar to the one he had in August 2006. Dr. S recommended that 
he remain in therapy with a qualified psychologist or psychiatrist, receive medication, 
and be reevaluated in several years. Dr. S noted that the underlying dynamics remain 
and are untreated. Applicant’s mental and personality conditions impair his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. See AG ¶ 27. His failure to fully and candidly disclose 
psychiatric information, during his July 5, 2011 psychological interview by Dr. S shows 
lack of judgment and “raise[s] questions about [Applicant’s] reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information.” See AG ¶ 15.   
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude psychological conditions 
and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude he 
is not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline I:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
