 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07789 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffries, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 14 delinquent debts, totaling about $40,466. He has a 
history of delinquent debt, and he did not make sufficient progress resolving his 
delinquent SOR debts. He did not provide complete information about his delinquent 
debts and judgments on his September 19, 2007 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86); 
however, he provided sufficient information to place the government on notice of his 
financial problems. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated. Financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2007, Applicant submitted his SF-86. On June 10, 2011, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct).1 The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On August 31, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR. On March 30, 2012, 
Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On April 
2, 2012, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 17, 2012, DOHA issued a 
hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 15, 2012. Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered seven exhibits, and Applicant offered one 
exhibit. (GE 1-7) (Tr. 8, 13) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-7 and AE A. 
(Tr. 8, 13) On May 25, 2012, I received the transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted responsibility for all of the SOR debts.  For 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, he admitted that he did not disclose all of the financial information 
requested on his SF-86. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who is a specialist 
in information technology. (Tr. 14-15; GE 1) He has been working for his employer 
continuously since June 2010. (Tr. 16-17) He served in Afghanistan and Iraq on behalf 
of the contractor. (Tr. 47-48) He was scrupulous about protecting classified documents. 
(Tr. 48) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1996. (Tr. 19) He has 
approximately 32 hours of college credits. (Tr. 19) Applicant has a 10-year-old daughter, 
who lived with her mother overseas for several years. (Tr. 21-22, 28-29) He does not 
pay the mother of his daughter any child support by mutual agreement. (Tr. 21) He 
married his spouse in April 2008, and they have a three-year-old son and two-year-old 
daughter. (Tr. 20-21) His spouse does not work outside their home because child care 
expenses would absorb most of her paycheck. (Tr. 42-43) 
 
Applicant joined the Army in September 1996. (Tr. 15, 17) He served overseas in 
Korea and Southwest Asia. (Tr. 44-45) In 2004, he left active duty as a sergeant (E-5), 
and he received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 15, 17) He left active duty because he had 
sole custody of his daughter, and he lacked a family care plan. (Tr. 18; GE 1) His 
                                            
1At Department Counsel’s request, I changed the amount of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h from 
“$2,371” to “$2,731,” and in SOR ¶ 2.b, I changed the name of the document from “Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions” to “Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).” (Tr. 10-
11) Applicant did not have any objection to these changes. (Tr. 10) 
 
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
military occupational specialty (MOS) was wire systems installer (31L). (Tr. 18) He has 
held a security clearance without any security violations since 1997. (Tr. 14)  
 
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR and credit reports lists 14 delinquent debts, totaling about 
$40,466. They describe two judgments, totaling $6,050 as follows: 1.a was filed in 2005 
for furniture ($2,050), and 1.b was filed in 2004 ($4,000). (Tr. 34-35) He has 12 debts 
that are charged off or placed for collection, totaling $34,416 as follows: 1.c is a furniture 
account ($1,927) (Tr. 34-35); 1.d is a collection account resulting from a repossessed 
vehicle ($13,446) (Tr. 36); 1.e is a collection account ($3,615) (Tr. 36); 1.f is a debt 
owed to the Department of Veterans Affairs ($308) (Tr. 36-38); 1.g is a debt owed to a 
credit union ($4,035) (Tr. 37-38); 1.h is a collection account for a student loan ($2,731) 
(Tr. 39); 1.i is a post exchange account ($137) (Tr. 38); 1.j is a collection account 
($1,316) (Tr. 38); 1.k is a collection account ($384) (Tr. 38); 1.l is a collection account 
($122); 1.m is a collection account ($6,207) (Tr. 38-39); and 1.n is a 
telecommunications collection account ($188). Applicant believes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.g are duplicates of each other because they are owed to the same creditor 
and are for approximately the same amounts. (Tr. 37-38) His statement that the post 
exchange credit card account ($137) and the VA debt ($308) are duplicates is not 
established because there is no evidence that the two accounts are linked to each 
other. (Tr. 38)         
 
Applicant had financial difficulties after he left active duty. (Tr. 23) He was 
unemployed from April 2004 until October 2004. (Tr. 24) He received unemployment 
compensation for 16 or 17 weeks. (Tr. 25) Applicant did not make any payments to any 
of his SOR creditors. (Tr. 30) His income is enough to pay his current debts and 
expenses; however, he did not believe he had sufficient income to pay his SOR debts. 
(Tr. 30-31) His spouse pays their monthly bills. (Tr. 32) Applicant’s personal financial 
statement (PFS) indicates that he has a negative remainder of $15. (Tr. 31; GE 2 at 
101)  
 
The SOR does not include all of his financial problems. Applicant has some new 
medical copayments that he is unable to fully pay; however, he is making some partial 
payments.3 (Tr. 33) He is unsure of the status of his student loans; however, he does 
                                            
3The SOR did not allege that Applicant had failed to pay medical bills, student loans, or taxes. In 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for the five above purposes, and not for any 
other purpose. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
plan to pay his student loans. (Tr. 33) He believes he owes the federal and state 
governments for taxes. (Tr. 37) 
 
Applicant received financial counseling. (Tr. 40) He investigated the possibility of 
consolidating his debts. (Tr. 40) He decided against a debt consolidation because it was 
not practical, and he rejected bankruptcy because he believed it reflected poorly on his 
credit rating. (Tr. 40-41) He currently lives paycheck to paycheck, as he has about $30 
to $40 left over at the end of the month after paying bills and expenses. (Tr. 42) He 
thought a raise was likely, and he could apply the raise to his debts. (Tr. 41-42)   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a indicates that Section 27d of his September 19, 2007 SF-86 asked 
whether in the last seven years, he had any judgments filed against him that had not 
been paid. Applicant responded, “No” to this question, and he did not disclose the 
judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.   
 
SOR ¶ 2.b indicates that Section 28b of his September 19, 2007 SF-86 asked, 
“Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant responded, “No,” 
and he did not disclose the delinquent debts discussed in the previous section.  
 
In response to Section 27b of Applicant’s September 19, 2007 SF-86, which 
asked about wages garnished or property repossessed in the last seven years, 
Applicant indicated, “Yes” and disclosed a $15,000 delinquent debt, resulting from a 
vehicle repossession. Although no creditor is specifically named, this debt appears to be 
associated with SOR ¶ 1.d ($13,466 debt resulting from vehicle repossession). (GE 1) 
Applicant did not disclose any other derogatory financial information on this SF-86.  
 
 Applicant knew about one of the judgments and did not disclose it because he 
did not have the address needed for his SF-86. (SOR response) For the debts over 90 
days delinquent, he said his disclosure of the $15,000 debt was meant to be a summary 
of his delinquent debt total. (SOR response) He did not disclose additional negative 
financial information because he did not have his credit report, and he lacked specific 
information about his creditors and debts.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant said that he did not disclose his delinquent debts 
because he did not have all of the names and addresses of the creditors. (Tr. 39) He 
decided to give an approximate total value of his debts to disclose the issue of 
delinquent debt. (Tr. 40) 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Analysis 
   
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his SOR response, and his hearing record. Applicant’s SOR alleges 14 
delinquent debts, totaling about $40,466. Some debts have been delinquent since 2004 
or 2005. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts does not warrant full application of any 
mitigating conditions to all SOR debts. The debt is SOR ¶ 1.g is mitigated because it is 
duplicated in SOR ¶ 1.b (judgment for $4,000).  
 
Applicant fell behind on his debts because of the costs of daily living, his 
spouse’s unemployment, and his own unemployment. He received financial counseling. 
He showed some good faith when he admitted responsibility for his SOR debts in his 
SOR response and at his hearing.   
 
Applicant has not taken reasonable actions to resolve most of his SOR debts. He 
has three SOR debts that are less than $200, and he has not paid them. He did not 
provide documentation proving that he maintained contact with his SOR creditors, and 
he did not provide any documentation showing his attempts to negotiate payment plans 
with his SOR creditors.5 There is insufficient evidence that his financial problem is being 
resolved and is under control. He did not establish his financial responsibility. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) applies. Section 27d of his September 19, 2007 SF-86 asked whether 
in the last seven years, he had any judgments filed against him that had not been paid. 
Section 28b of his September 19, 2007 SF-86 asked, “Are you currently over 90 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant responded, “No” to both questions, when he knew 
the correct answer was “Yes.” He failed to disclose the judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. and the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.n. Inquiry about the applicability of mitigating 
conditions is required.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶ 17(f) applies. Applicant disclosed the repossession of a vehicle and 
$15,000 in delinquent debt. He provided notice to the Government that he had financial 
problems. He failed to provide requested financial information because he did not want 
to collect the requested information. He was derelict in his responsibilities. He did not 
intend to deceive the Government about his derogatory financial information. He 
showed some remorse when he acknowledged that the omission of the derogatory 
financial information was a mistake, and he regretted his decision. The allegation of 
intentional falsification of his July 13, 2010 SF-86 is unsubstantiated because I do not 
believe he intended to deceive the Government.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant is a 34-year-old information technology specialist, who has been working for 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
his employer continuously since June 2010. He served in Afghanistan and Iraq as a 
contractor employee. He graduated from high school and earned approximately 32 
hours of college credits. He honorably served on active duty in the Army as a wire 
systems installer (31L) from 1996 to 2004. He was deployed overseas in Korea and 
Southwest Asia. I am confident that he has the ability and maturity to comply with 
security requirements. He understands the importance of being honest on his SF-86. 
Some circumstances beyond his control, such as insufficient income and unemployment 
adversely affected his financial circumstances. He is an intelligent person who knows 
what he must do to establish his financial responsibility. There is no evidence of security 
violations, disloyalty, or that he would intentionally violate national security. His 
admissions about his debts are an important step towards rehabilitation and mitigation 
of security concerns.   
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant failed to mitigate 13 SOR delinquent debts, totaling about $36,000. 
He failed to prove that he could not have made greater progress resolving and 
documenting resolution of his SOR debts. He did not provide documentary proof that he 
made any payments to any of the SOR creditors. Three SOR debts are less than $200 
each.  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude personal conduct concerns 
are mitigated; however, financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h to 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
