 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND 
APPECOMPANY AS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07219 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Rivera, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant knowingly accessed classified information without having the required 
documentation. He improperly used his personal computer to process controlled 
unclassified information. He improperly marked an unclassified proposal as Secret to 
improve the possibility that his employer would receive a government contract. He was 
honest with Defense Security Service (DSS) investigators and credible at this hearing. 
Personal conduct concerns are mitigated; however, handling protected information 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 21, 
2008. On December 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under 
Guidelines K (handling protected information) and E (personal conduct).1 Applicant 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
answered the SOR on January 5, 2012, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
On February 21, 2012, Applicant’s case was assigned to another administrative 
judge. On March 8, 2012, DOHA transferred Applicant’s case to me. On May 3, 2012, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 22, 2012. Applicant’s 
hearing was held on May 22-23, 2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 18. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits, which are cited by 
Applicant’s tabbing methodology. (Transcript (Tr.) 40-46; 84-87; GE 1-18) There were 
no objections, and I admitted GE 1-18 and Applicant’s proffered exhibits. (Tr. 51-52, 87) 
GE 19 for identification is the list of Government exhibits. (Tr. 52) I received the hearing 
transcript on May 31, 2012. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Before the hearing, Department Counsel made a motion to permit a material, 
factual witness to testify using a speaker telephone. (Tr. 18-19) Applicant objected, and 
I sustained Applicant’s objection. (Tr. 19; Appellate Exhibit 1) The witness testified in 
person. (Tr. 54-140) 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 1.g 
to allege that in January 2009, Applicant violated security protocols when he used his 
personally-owned computer to process controlled unclassified information. (Tr. 373) 
Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 373-374) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted, with explanations, the allegation in SOR ¶ 
1.a - that he accessed classified material in a request for proposals (RFP) without 
proper authorization. At the hearing, he admitted SOR ¶ 1.g - that he violated security 
protocols when he used his personally-owned computer to process controlled 
unclassified information. He denied the remaining SOR allegations with explanations. 
His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the 
evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered his testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 73-year-old consultant working for several defense contractors. (Tr. 
7; GE 1) He served on active duty in the Army from 1958 to 1961. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in classical languages in 1974, and a master’s degree in operations 
research and systems analysis in 1977. He has held a security clearance for over 35 
years. He worked in the federal civil service from 1961 to 1999, and he retired as a 
Senior Executive Service (SES) 5. He was an SES from 1981 to 1999. After his 
retirement, he worked for various defense contractors until the present. (Tr. 10-12) He 
has many years of experience in material development, government contracting 
practices, and the security clearance processes. (Tr. 198) He has written proposals for 
government contracts, and he is thoroughly familiar with security and procurement rules 
and procedures. (Tr. 282) Aside from the SOR allegations, there has never been an 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
allegation that Applicant violated security rules. (Tr. 13) He is currently a senior vice 
president at L, a company with government contracts. (Tr. 199)  
 
Around 2008, a Department of Defense (DoD) entity was developing a military 
vehicle. The DoD entity sent out requests for proposals (AE RFP 10) that contained a 
classified annex. Company A hired Applicant to generate a proposals in response to the 
entity’s RFP shortly before Company A’s proposals was due.  
 
 Applicant’s consultant agreement with Company L was issued in January 2009. 
(Tr. 156, 158) At the time, L had a facility site clearance,2 but it did not have an 
information assurance program. Applicant erroneously believed that Company L also 
had safeguarding authority (authority to store classified information). (Tr. 182, 311, 317) 
In June 2008, Company L lost its authority to store classified information, and it was not 
reinstated by January 2009. (Tr. 142-145, 147) Applicant arrived at Company A’s place 
of business on January 2, 2009. (Tr. 208-209) He knew that Company A had applied for 
a facility clearance; however, it would not be approved before the proposal was due. 
(Tr. 209)  
 
 In compliance with the DoD 5220.22-M, National Industrial Security Program 
Manual (NISPOM), February 28, 2006, the RFP entity refused to permit contractors or 
companies to access the classified annex of the RFP without a DD Form 254 (DoD 
Contract Security Classification Specification). The security manager for the entity 
issuing the RFP with a classified annex generated DD Form 254s for classified 
contracts. (Tr. 55-56, 61)  
 
A company interested in making an offer on the contract could request the 
classified RFP annex. The security manager reviewed their request for a DD Form 254 
to ensure the company had a facility security clearance, classified storage capability in 
their facility (if they were going to have classified information in their facility), and if an 
individual working for the company had a clearance. (Tr. 56-57, 59-60, 101) Without a 
DD Form 254, a company or individuals working for the company were not authorized to 
review a particular contract file, including any classified annex of the contract, 
information for bids (IFB), and RFPs. (Tr. 58, 60-61, 126) Applicant knew that a DD 
Form 254 was required for him to work on a classified contract. (Tr. 282) Applicant, 
Company L, and Company A did not have a DD Form 254 to respond to the entity’s 
RFP. (Tr. 62, 88-90, 96-100, 162, 184)  
  
On January 5, 2009, Applicant went to Company FP, which had the classified 
annex to review it. (Tr. 214) He specifically asked FP’s facility security officer to verify 
his security clearance (Tr. 288-289), and to observe him while he took some notes, 
containing the paragraph numbers and paragraph headings of the classified annex. (Tr. 
                                            
2The DSS report states that Company L lost their facility storage clearance in 2008, because they 
lacked the need for it. L could have had their clearance to store Secret documents restored by 
establishing a need to safeguard or store classified information. (Tr. 184-186; GE 15) The DSS report 
notes that L had Top Secret facility authorization. (GE 15 at 2) 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
214, 371) Applicant denied that he copied any classified information. (Tr. 371) He 
provided a copy of his notes as an exhibit. (Tr. 215; AE 1.a.2-4, 1.b.3) He wanted 
Company A’s proposal to have the same organization or format as the classified annex 
because he believed the proposal would be summarily rejected if it lacked the 
sequencing of the classified annex. (Tr. 298-299)  
 
Applicant admitted that he took a shortcut and reviewed the classified annex at 
Company FP, in violation of the rule that he needed a DD Form 254 to document his 
authority for access. (Tr. 218) He said that he was not thinking about circumventing or 
“disregard[ing] a basic rule” when he accessed classified information at FP without first 
obtaining a DD Form 254. (Tr. 283, 301) He promised that he would never violate such 
a rule again. (Tr. 302)  
 
Applicant denied the allegation that he took classified documentation from FP’s 
facility. (Tr. 217, 223-224; SOR ¶ 1.b; GE 15) He inserted in the proposal certain 
unclassified test procedures and results, but no classified information.3 In the executive 
summary of his proposal, he indicated the test results in the proposal would probably 
need to be updated. (Tr. 215, 219-220, 306) He emphasized that the only information 
from the classified annex included in the proposal were the paragraph headings, which 
were not classified. (Tr. 217, 227)  
 
Initially, Applicant planned to submit an unclassified proposal. (Tr. 311, 317-318; 
GE 4 at 4) Later, Applicant determined that the proposal needed to go through classified 
channels because the RFP required this processing. (Tr. 311-314) The RFP indicated, 
“Offers must have a copy of the classified annex in order to meaningfully respond to the 
solicitation.” (Tr. 207; AE RFP 10 at 10, ¶ L.1.4.1) 
 
Applicant told the security manager that he double wrapped and marked the 
proposal as Secret; however, he told her that the material was not actually classified. 
(Tr. 114; AE 2.c.8) Incorrectly marking documents as classified violates classification 
rules. (Tr. 114) The SOR did not allege that Applicant improperly marked his proposals 
as Secret. Applicant insisted that he did not mark the internal pages with a 
classification. (Tr. 249) He said he did not think the document was actually classified 
unless each page is marked individually, and it reaches a classification authority. (Tr. 
248-249, 365-366) He said that one could infer that a package with a classified cover 
sheet contained classified information. (Tr. 365-366) As the person who generated the 
document, he had derivative classification authority, and his marking of the document 
Secret renders it presumptively Secret.4 (Tr. 249) He said that he marked some of the 
individual pages as unclassified. (Tr. 250)  
                                            
3In general, if the contractor develops the test procedures and results, and there is no end 
application specified on the vehicle, then the data would not be classified. (Tr. 308) The contract security 
classification guide “is the bible” under these circumstances for determining when or if a document is 
classified. (Tr. 309)  
 
4NISPOM, paragraph 4-102(b) Derivative Classification Responsibilities states: 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant copied his proposal on several CDs. He placed a CD marked Secret 
into the computer system at Company L. (Tr. 342) He used the printers at L to make two 
copies of the proposal for the RFP entity, and left one copy of the proposal at Company 
L. (Tr. 343) The copy of the proposal left at Company L was marked Secret. (Tr. 344-
346) Applicant insisted that nothing in the proposal was actually Secret. (Tr. 344) The 
documents were marked Secret to meet the expectations of the RFP entity, to comply 
with the RFP instructions, and because Applicant believed an unclassified proposal 
submission would not be processed to the evaluation committee.5  (Tr. 228, 346) 
Applicant kept another copy of the proposal on a mass storage device or flash drive. 
(Tr. 346-347) 
 
 Applicant prepared the proposal on his personal computer, and it contained 
controlled unclassified information (CUI). (Tr. 326-332, 341-342) He acknowledged that 
he violated a security rule when he used his personal computer to prepare the proposal. 
(Tr. 333, 350, 392) He said he used a flash drive and not the computer hard drive to 
store the information. (Tr. 374)     
                                                                                                                                             
b. Employees who copy or extract classified information from another document, or who 
reproduce or translate an entire document, shall be responsible: 
 
(1) For marking the new document or copy with the same classification markings as 
applied to the information or document from which the new document or copy was 
prepared and (2) For challenging the classification if there is reason to believe the 
information is classified unnecessarily or improperly. 
 
NISPOM, paragraph 4-104. Challenges to Classification, provides:  
 
Should a contractor believe (a) that information is classified improperly or unnecessarily; 
or (b) that current security considerations justify downgrading to a lower classification or 
upgrading to a higher classification; or (c) that the security classification guidance is 
improper or inadequate, the contractor shall discuss such issues with the pertinent GCA 
for remedy. If a solution is not forthcoming, and the contractor believes that corrective 
action is still required, a formal written challenge shall be made to the GCA. Such 
challenges shall include a description sufficient to identify the issue, the reasons why the 
contractor believes that corrective action is required, and any recommendations for 
appropriate corrective action. In any case, the information in question shall be 
safeguarded as required by this Manual for its assigned or proposed level of 
classification, whichever is higher, until action is completed. 
 
5The SOR did not allege that Applicant intentionally marked documents Secret that he knew were 
unclassified. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five 
circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct about improperly marking documents as 
Secret for the five above purposes, and not for any other purpose.  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
  
The security manager believes that in early January 2009, she received two 
proposals classified at the Secret level prepared by Applicant on behalf of Companies A 
and L in response to the RFP. (Tr. 64-68, 105-110, 120, 123; AE 1.d.5) Actually, 
Applicant submitted two proposals on behalf of Company A. (Tr. 258) The second 
proposal was submitted because Company A wanted to amend the executive summary 
of their first proposal. (Tr. 258) The first one was mailed, and Applicant hand delivered 
the second one. (Tr. 258-259, 337-339, 355) Applicant double wrapped the packages, 
and on the inside it was marked Secret. (Tr. 318, 355) Applicant testified the contents 
were not actually classified and the markings were form over substance in order for the 
proposal to receive a more positive consideration from the source selection group. (Tr. 
318) Applicant insisted that none of the internal paragraphs or pages were marked as 
classified. (Tr. 339) 
 
The RFP entity reviewed Applicant’s proposal, and sent numerous items for 
discussion (IFD), using email, discussing his proposal. (Tr. 352-353) The RFP entity did 
not express any concern about his failure to indicate any part of the proposal was 
classified. (Tr. 261-266; GE 11 at 32)  
 
The security manager knew that she had not issued a DD Form 254 to 
Companies A and L, and Applicant. (Tr. 64-68) She wondered whether they had facility 
security clearances. (Tr. 124) She asked Applicant for the DD Form 254s from 
Companies A and L because she did not have one on file to document the release of 
the classified annex. (Tr. 65) Companies A and L did not have DD Form 254s. (Tr. 371) 
According to the security manager, the submitters are responsible for classifying their 
submissions. (Tr. 65) She recalled that some paragraphs of their submissions were 
marked Secret. (Tr. 66, 103-104) However, she was unable to opine whether or not the 
proposals received from Companies A and L were actually classified. (Tr. 68) The base 
document that her company sent out seeking RFPs was unclassified. (Tr. 66) 
 
 Upon receipt of the proposals from Company A, the security manager contacted 
Applicant and asked him where he prepared the documents and his authority for 
preparing them. (Tr. 70) He responded that he had a letter from Company A authorizing 
him to prepare the proposals. (Tr. 71-72) The security manager knew that Applicant was 
a consultant for both Companies L and A, and that he prepared both proposals. (Tr. 76) 
Applicant told the security manager that he took classified information out of L’s facility 
on a CD, in a notebook, and in a laptop computer. (Tr. 73, 134) He prepared the 
proposal in a closed area in Company L. (Tr. 74) He did not advise her that the 
packages did not contain classified information. (Tr. 125)  
 
Company L did not have an accredited information system (AIS) approval to 
process classified information. (Tr. 74, 144-145) It would be a security violation to open 
a classified CD or download a classified document onto Company L’s server or onto 
one of Company L’s computer hard drives. (Tr. 146) The security manager knew that 
Company L had a facility clearance, but no authorized storage for classified documents. 
(Tr. 71) Company A did not have a facility clearance. (Tr. 71) She asked Applicant 
whether he viewed the classified annex to the contract, and he said that he received the 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
information from another individual, who viewed the annex and provided the information 
to Applicant. (Tr. 75, 110-111, 134-135; AE 2.c.8) She contacted military intelligence 
and DSS about her concerns. (Tr. 72-73) 
 
 A DSS investigator (M) went to Company L to find out about a possible “spill” of 
classified information. (Tr. 151-152) The investigator removed two binders, two CDs, 
and a laptop from Company L’s safe. A Company L employee told the investigator that 
Applicant had provided these materials. (Tr. 153, 184) One CD was marked Secret, and 
the other CD had the classification crossed out. (Tr. 153, 155) The investigator did not 
review the contents of the CDs. (Tr. 173) The top and bottom of the cover sheet on 
each binder were marked Secret. (Tr. 155, 175, 180) M did not see paragraph markings 
of classification. (Tr. 175) Inside the binders, M recalled that a small portion of the 
pages were marked Secret. (Tr. 155, 173) A Company L employee said that he was told 
the documents were not classified, and M asked the Company L employee why they 
were marked Secret. The Company L’s employee noted that “the threat information had 
to be married up in there.” (Tr. 187, 193-194) The documents marked Secret are 
presumed to be Secret, and there was no classification review to determine whether 
they were properly classified. (Tr. 174, 188-190) M did not compare the documents from 
Company L’s safe with the RFP’s classified annex or compare it to the RFP entity’s 
classification guide. (Tr. 191) M removed the two binders and the CDs from Company 
L’s facility, and she retained the binders and CDs in her office until they were destroyed. 
(Tr. 154, 163)  
 
Applicant said he marked one CD as Secret because he wanted it to conform to 
the requirements of the RFP. (Tr. 341) He denied that any of the information on the 
CDs, laptop computer, or in the notebook was classified. (Tr. 246-247) 
 
Another DSS investigator (S) stated that Applicant told him he had a DD Form 
254 authorizing him access to the RFP entity’s classified annex. S knew that Applicant 
did not have a DD Form 254. (Tr. 234-236; GE 15 at 3; SOR ¶ 2.a) Applicant credibly 
testified that he never told S that he had a DD Form 254. (Tr. 267)  
 
Applicant told S that he accessed the RFP’s classified annex at Company FP, 
and he copied some information from it; however, Applicant denied that he removed 
classified information from FP. (GE 15 at 3) SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that Applicant lied to a 
DSS investigator by stating he had not removed classified material from the RFP’s 
classified annex located in FP’s facility. (GE 15 at 3) Applicant described S’s claims as 
“patently absurd.” (Tr. 234-245, 268-269) Considering the evidence as a whole I find 
that Applicant did not remove classified material from FP. Therefore, he did not make 
false statements to S. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.c alleges that Applicant lied to S by stating that he prepared the 
proposal in a sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF) on an accredited 
information system (AIS) at Company L. Applicant said that he prepared the proposal at 
Company L (Tr. 154), and he denied that he told S that he prepared the proposal in a 
SCIF on an AIS. Applicant knew that S could easily determine whether Company L had 
a SCIF and an AIS. There is no reason that Applicant would lie about these issues as 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
he maintained he had not brought classified information or prepared a classified 
proposal at Company L.  
 
SOR ¶ 2.e notes the applicability of FAR Clause - 52.204-2, also known as the 
security requirements clause. This FAR clause reinforces the NISPOM by incorporating 
those requirements into government contracts. SOR ¶ 2.e indicates that Applicant’s 
conduct as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f also violates Federal Acquisition 
Regulation (FAR) clause 52.204-2.6  
 
The security manager believed that Applicant told her that he prepared Company 
L’s proposal in a SCIF, and that Company L had an accredited AIS. (Tr. 269-270; SOR 
¶ 2.c) Applicant testified he would never use language about an “accredited AIS,” and 
he denied that he made these statements to her. (Tr. 269, 273) He may have agreed 
with R that Company L or Company A had a cage code. (Tr. 270-271) A cage code is 
used to identify a company’s security information. (Tr. 363) He told the security 
manager that Company L had a Top Secret clearance, and he mistakenly told the 
                                            
6FAR Clause 52.204-2 provides: 
 
FAR CLAUSE - 52.204-2  Security Requirements “CLAUSE”   
 
The Industrial Security Program prescribes requirements, restrictions, and other 
safeguards that are necessary to prevent unauthorized disclosure of classified 
information and to control authorized disclosure of information released by the US 
Government Executive Branch Departments and Agencies to their contractors. The 
proscribed Federal guidance is the National Industrial Security Program Manual 
(NISPOM). 
 
The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) defines a “Classified Contract” as “Any 
contract that requires, or will require, access to classified information (Confidential, 
Secret, or Top Secret) by the contractor or its employees in the performance of the 
contract. A contract may be a classified contract even though the contract document itself 
is not classified.”   
 
Company Al “Classified Contracts” must have, at a minimum, the Clause 52.204-2, 
Security Requirements, incorporated into the contract. This clause binds the contractor to 
meet the security requirements identified in the [NISPOM].   
 
The FAR states we “shall” use a DD Form 254 (Contract Security Classification 
Specifications) for classified contracts. This form must be part of the contract package 
and is used to identify other security requirements that HQDA would impose on a 
contractor. The DD Form 254 informs the contractor of the level of information they will 
be required to access, the level of security clearance the contractors will need, and how 
they will process, store, transmit, and destroy the classified information when the contract 
is complete. 
 
If the contractor then subcontracts the work, they are obligated, under the [NISPOM], to 
pass those requirements on to the subcontract.   
 
Contracts requiring work that is unclassified but sensitive should also be evaluated to 
ensure that contractors have undergone an appropriate level of background investigation 
to perform the required duties, and contractors must be made aware of any procedures 
or requirements regarding proper protection of unclassified but sensitive information. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
security manager that Company L had the capability of safeguarding classified 
information. (Tr. 271, 363-364) A SCIF was not a material requirement for the 
solicitation. (Tr. 273)    
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Analysis 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
AG ¶ 34 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal 
or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
“palm” or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; 
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view classified or other protected 
information outside one’s need to know; 
 
(e) copying classified or other protected information in a manner designed 
to conceal or remove classification or other document control markings; 
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual's need-to-know; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management; and 
 
(i) failure to comply with rules or regulations that results in damage to the 
National Security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶¶ 34(b), (c), (d), (f), and (g) apply. Applicant and Companies A and L lacked 
the required DD Form 254, and therefore he and both Companies were not permitted 
access to the classified annex to the entity’s RFP. Applicant went to Company FP and 
accessed their copy of the classified annex of the RFP in violation of the NISPOM. He 
also used his personally owned computer to process CUI to generate Company A’s 
proposal, which violated security rules. 
 
AG ¶¶ 34(a), (e), 34(h) and, 34(i) do not apply. Applicant did not copy or disclose 
any classified information, there is no evidence that he received counseling about 
security rules prior to his security violations, and national security was not damaged.    
 
AG ¶ 35 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant is very knowledgeable 
about security rules, and remedial training is unnecessary. He knew what he did 
violated security rules and procedures, and he did it anyway. The Appeal Board has 
explained why security violations are difficult to mitigate: 
    
Security violations are one of the strongest possible reasons for denying 
or revoking access to classified information, as they raise very serious 
questions about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information. Once it is established that Applicant has committed a security 
violation, he has “a very heavy burden of demonstrating that [he] should 
be entrusted with classified information. Because security violations strike 
at the very heart of the industrial security program, an Administrative 
Judge must give any claims of reform and rehabilitation strict scrutiny.” In 
many security clearance cases, applicants are denied a clearance for 
having an indicator of a risk that they might commit a security violation 
(e.g., alcohol abuse, delinquent debts or drug use). Here the issue is not 
merely an indicator, rather the Judge found Applicant disregarded in-place 
security procedures in violation of the NISPOM. 
 
(Citations omitted). ISCR Case No. 04-04264 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Sep. 8, 2006). Applicant’s 
security violations occurred in January 2009. He assures that he will strictly comply with 
security rules in the future. His assurances are sincere. Nevertheless, more time must 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
elapse to eliminate doubt concerning his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Three personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable:   
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an . . . investigator . . . ;7 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
                                            
7The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply. Applicant credibly refuted the DSS investigator’s 
statement indicating that Applicant told him he had a DD Form 254 (SOR ¶ 2.a), and 
that he prepared Company A’s proposal in a SCIF on an accredited system at Company 
L (SOR ¶ 2.c). Applicant had previously talked to the security manager about these 
same issues, and Applicant was well aware that the Government knew he did not have 
a DD Form 254, and that Company L did not have a SCIF. This information was readily 
available to DSS. Applicant is too intelligent and detail oriented to make such 
statements to the DSS investigator. Applicant was honestly mistaken when he said that 
Company L continued to have classified safeguarding authority. The allegation that 
Applicant removed classified material from the RFP’s classified annex located in 
Company FP’s facility is not supported by substantial evidence. (SOR ¶ 2.b)  
 
AG ¶ 16(c) does not apply because there is sufficient credible adverse information 
under the handling protected information guideline for an adverse determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies. Applicant violated security rules when he accessed the 
classified annex to the entity’s RFP at Company FP without a DD Form 254, and when 
he used his personally owned computer to process CUI to generate Company A’s 
proposal. Violation of security policies and rules adversely affected Applicant’s personal, 
professional, and community standing. Because the Government established 
disqualifying conditions, further analysis concerning the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) applies. The allegations that Applicant lied to DSS investigators are 
unsubstantiated. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a to 2.c) As previously stated, Applicant credibly refuted the 
investigator’s statement. Because of his conversations with the security manager, 
Applicant was well aware that the Government knew he did not have a DD Form 254, 
and Company L did not have a SCIF. Applicant is too intelligent and detail oriented to 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
make such statements to the DSS investigator. Applicant was honestly mistaken when 
he said that Company L continued to have classified safeguarding authority.  
 
AG ¶ 17(e) applies to AG ¶ 16(e). Even though his violation of security policies 
adversely affected his personal, professional, and community standing, his disclosure 
eliminated any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant is fully 
committed to complying with security requirements. He could not be coerced into 
compromising national security by threats to disclose his security violations.  
 
Any remaining personal conduct concerns under Guideline E are mitigated 
because the security violations are duplicated under both Guidelines E and K. The 
scope of his security-related conduct is thoroughly addressed under Guideline K and 
the Whole-Person Concept.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and under the whole-person concept. 
(AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines K and E in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant is a 73-year-old consultant working with defense contractors. He served four 
years on active duty in the Army. He earned a master’s degree in operations research 
and systems analysis. He worked in the federal civil service from 1961 to 1999. He was 
an SES from 1981 to 1999, and he subsequently worked for various defense 
contractors for several years. He has held a security clearance for over 35 years.  
 
Applicant has many years of experience in material development. He is 
thoroughly familiar with security and procurement rules and procedures. Aside from the 
SOR allegations, there is no evidence to show that he has violated security rules and 
procedures. During his 35 years of government service, he was entrusted with important 
responsibilities and he made major contributions to national security. I am confident that 
he has the ability and maturity to comply with security requirements. He is an intelligent 
person, who understands the importance of compliance with security rules. There is no 
evidence of disloyalty. His admission that he intentionally violated security rules is an 
important step towards rehabilitation and mitigation of security concerns.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant knowingly violated three security rules: (1) He knew that the RFP 
entity refused to permit contractors or companies to access the classified annex of the 
RFP without a DD Form 254. He and his employer lacked the required DD Form 254. 
He went to Company FP to circumvent this security requirement, and he accessed FP’s 
copy of the classified annex of the RFP; (2) He used his personally owned computer to 
process CUI to generate Company A’s proposal; and (3) He marked Company A’s 
proposal as Secret even though the contents were not classified in order to increase the 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
probability that Company A’s proposal would receive serious examination by the RFP 
entity. His security violations show lack of judgment and raise unresolved questions 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
  
Applicant’s personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, he failed 
to mitigate handling protected information security concerns. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of Company Al of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, 
it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
