 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09953 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was $68,000 past due on his home mortgage, which has gone to 
foreclosure. He failed to document he has addressed any delinquency arising from the 
foreclosure. He had five other delinquent accounts which totaled less than $2,000. He 
failed to rebut or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 14, 2011, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
  
 On December 12, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On March 15, 2012, I was assigned the case. On April 15, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on April 23, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 8, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but did not submit exhibits. One 
additional witness testified on his behalf. The record was held open to allow Applicant to 
submit additional information. On April 30, 2012, material was submitted. Department 
Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted into the record as Exs. A 
through F. On May 1, 2012, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old information systems security officer who has worked 
for a defense contractor since August 2006, and seeks to maintain a security clearance. 
(Ex. 1) Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Navy from March 1996 through August 
2002. His grade at the time of discharge was E-5. (Ex. 6) He is also a full-time student. 
(Tr. 44)  
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor in the security department, who sees Applicant 
daily, states he holds Applicant in high regard. (Tr. 43) Applicant does above the call of 
duty and beyond in reporting things that don’t seem right. (Tr. 43) His supervisor states 
Applicant is not living beyond his means. (Tr. 46) Applicant was upfront about reporting 
his debt. (Tr. 48)  
 
 The SOR lists six debts placed for collection, past due, or unpaid. The first five 
total $1,793. The final debt was $68,000 past due on his mortgage. In 2008, Applicant 
was laid off from his job, resulting in the loss of health insurance and the loss of his 
home. He had purchased his home in 2007, but was unable to continue making his 
monthly mortgage payments when he lost his job. (Ex. 5) He owed $800 (SOR 1.a) for 
his son’s surgery. His son was born May 1998 and needed surgery to repair a hernia 
and attach a testicle to the lower part of his scrotum. (Tr. 24) Applicant was making $20 
monthly payments on the debt and in April 2012, paid $500 on this debt. (Ex. A, Tr. 25) 
This medical bill is now paid.  
 
 In 2007, Applicant’s company moved him to the company’s headquarters in a 
different state. (Tr. 28) On his arrival in the new state, he purchased a home for 
$225,000 with $700 monthly payments and no money down. (Tr. 36) The monthly 
payments increased to $1,485 when the taxes were reassessed. (Tr. 28) The initial 
 
3 
calculation was based on the value of an empty lot and not the fair market value of the 
home. In March 2007, before purchasing the home, he was divorced. (Ex. 1, Tr. 30) He 
remarried in November 2008. (Tr. 30)  
 
In 2008, the mortgage went past due two months after Applicant was laid off from 
employment. (Tr. 29) He provided no additional information as to the length of his 
unemployment. He continued living in the home for another nine months, until August 
2009. (Tr. 29) During an August 2010 personal subject interview, he stated that he did 
not know the name of the collection agency, but believed he was more than $40,000 
past due on his mortgage and the total due on the account was more than $215,000. 
(Ex. 5) At that time, he said he intended to work with an attorney to resolve this matter. 
However, it was not until April 2012, the month of the hearing, that he retained an 
attorney. (Tr. 37)  
 
Applicant has retained an attorney to assist him on the foreclosure stating, “I 
have contacted an attorney to look into the matter for me.” (Tr. 33, 37, 38) Applicant 
provided no documentation as to the status of this debt. The status of his legal 
representation is unclear. At the hearing, he stated he had recently been notified that 
two-and-a-half years after leaving the home, the home was to go to auction in January 
or February 2012. (Tr. 36). He was going to ask his attorney why it took so long to go to 
auction. (Tr. 32) He stated he had just recently received the auction notice paperwork 
and had turned it over to his attorney to determine his best course to alleviate the debt. 
(Tr. 27) He believes the home’s fair market value is $150,000. (Tr. 32) He has received 
no correspondence or information about the sale. (Tr. 36)  
 
As of August 2010, his monthly net income was $3,400 and his monthly 
expenses were $2,130, leaving net discretionary income of $1,270. (Ex. 5) As of 
September 2011, his net discretionary income was $250. (Ex. 6) He owns a 1995 Ford 
Bronco and a 2001 Ford Ranger pickup truck. (Tr. 34, Tr. 34) He lives with his in-laws 
and has no credit cards. (Tr. 34) He has funds in his company’s 401(k) retirement fund. 
As of December 2011, he had $7,000 in the account when he borrowed $3,000 to pay 
medical bills and other bills. (Tr. 35) He borrowed another $1,336.64 from his 401(k) 
account and paid the majority of the debts listed in the SOR. (Ex. A)  
 
Applicant contacted his local Veterans Affairs office to determine what financial 
counseling they offer. (Tr. 39) He has talked with his pastor about financial counseling. 
(Tr. 39) 
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Medical account for his 
son’s surgery. (Ex. 5) 
$800 Paid. Applicant paid $500 on this debt. 
(Ex. A)  
 
 
4 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Medical account for his 
son’s surgery. (Ex. 5) 
$800 Paid. Applicant paid $500 on this debt. 
(Ex. A)  
b Medical account . 
 
$64 
 
Paid. (Ex. A) This was incurred for his 
wife’s medical treatment. (Ex. 6)  
c Collection account. $175 Paid. (Exs. A and B)  
d Collection account for 
failing to return cable 
modem. (Tr. 26) 
$274 Paid $167.36. (Ex. A) Applicant asserts 
this bill has now been paid in full. (Ex. 
A) He asserts he turned in all cable 
equipment when he moved. (Tr. 26)  
e Collection account for 
telephone service. 
 
 
$480 Applicant terminated his cell phone 
service contract early when he had lost 
his job. (Ex. 5, 6) Paid $399. (Ex. A) 
Applicant asserts this bill has now been 
paid in full. (Ex. A) 
f Mortgage account past 
due. 
 
$68,000 Home went to foreclosure. Applicant 
provided no documentation as to the 
status of this debt.  
 Total debt listed in SOR $69,793  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
 
6 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was $68,000 past due on his mortgage for a home that has gone to 
foreclosure. He also had five additional delinquent accounts which totaled less than 
$2,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” 
and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has paid five delinquent accounts alleged in SOR 1.a through 1.e. I find 
for him as to these debts. His house has gone to foreclosure. He provided no 
documentation showing that he is no longer obligated on the original mortgage. None of 
the mitigating factors apply to the mortgage debt. He has not demonstrated that his 
mortgage debt has been paid it.  
 
 In 2007, following his March 2007 divorce, Applicant purchased a house with 
zero money down. Following the purchase, his monthly mortgage payments doubled 
when his real property taxes were based on the value of the home and not based on an 
empty lot. He asserted he was unemployed in 2008, however, he provided no additional 
information as to how long he was unemployed. When asked about his mortgage in 
 
7 
2010, he stated he believed he was $40,000 past due on the account and owed 
approximately $215,000 on the home. In August 2010, he said he intended to work with 
an attorney to address the debt, but he did not retain an attorney until April 2012. He 
believes the house went to auction in January or February of 2012. He provided no 
documentation establishing that he is no longer responsible on the mortgage following 
the sale of the home.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The purchase of a home is normally 
not the type of debt that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations. However, concern in a home purchase is raised if that 
purchase closely follows a divorce and the entire cost of the home is financed with no 
money down. The home was purchased in 2007. Applicant said he made two payments 
on the house. In 2009, he moved out of the home, and in 2012 it went to auction.  
 
 Such a large unaddressed debt casts doubt on the Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. In August 2010, he said he was hiring an attorney 
to assist him with the foreclosure. He asserts he retained an attorney in April 2012 – 21 
months later. Applicant provided no documentation as to what, if anything, the attorney 
has done to assist him with the debt.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
 
8 
merited. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance 
in the future, having paid the delinquent obligation arising from the foreclosure, 
established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the foreclosure 
debt, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) The debt arising from the foreclosure of his home remains a concern. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant    
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
