 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08449 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed approximately $15,000 on four charged-off or collection 
accounts, which are now included in his repayment plan. Applicant has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 14, 2012, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
  
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 On February 28, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On April 16, 2012, I was assigned the case. On May 23, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 5, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as did his wife, and submitted Ex. A, 
which was admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information. Additional material was submitted in a timely 
manner. Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted into 
the record as Ex. B through D. On June 13, 2012, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He 
admitted the remaining three debts, with explanations. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old electronic technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since April 2010.  
 
 In February 2012, Applicant received the SOR listing the two vehicle 
repossession debts and two debts for cell phone service. In March 2012, he sought 
assistance and contacted one financial company, but chose to go with a different debt 
repayment service. (Ex. A, B, C, Tr. 43). The agreement requires a $241 automatic-
monthly-debit from his bank account. (Ex. D, Tr. 26) On March 23, 2012, the first 
payment was made and payments have continued monthly since then. (Ex. A)  
 
 The debt repayment agreement includes the four SOR debts that total 
approximately $15,000: SOR 1.a, $971; SOR 1.b, $8,434; SOR 1.c, $5,115; and, SOR 
1.d, $522. (Ex. A, B) Applicant stated the debt resolution agreement provided that the 
debt repayment company would negotiate offers with the creditors and once an offer 
was accepted the debt would be paid or payments would start. The company has 
settled and paid the smallest of the four debts (SOR 1.d, $522). (Ex. B) When a debt is 
settled, the debt repayment company receives a $194 fee. (Ex. B, Tr. 49)  
 
 In 2003, Applicant’s father died and he received a $40,000 inheritance. (Tr. 78) 
The money was used to pay debts and $6,000 or $7,000 was used as a down payment 
on a truck purchase. (Tr. 79)  
In 2004, Applicant and his wife married, and they purchased a home. His annual 
salary was approximately $30,000. At the time, his spouse was working as a retail 
associate at $10 per hour. (Tr. 68) From 1995 through November 2005, Applicant was 
employed by an engineering firm working for a major automobile manufacturer. (Tr. 64, 
71) In 2005, his employer cut back his hours from 40 per week to 32 per week before 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
laying him off in November 2005. (Ex. 2) From January 2006 through August 2006, he 
was unemployed. (Tr. 45. 69) In August 2006, he moved to another state and started a 
job where he worked for a little less than one year. (Tr. 46, 72) In January or February 
2007, he obtained another job where he worked until the summer of 2007. (Tr. 46, 72) 
When that job ended, he moved to another city in the state and worked at a job for 
about a year. (Tr. 73) 
 
 When that job ended, Applicant was homeless for seven or eight months. (Tr. 83) 
In April 2010, an acquaintance helped him to move to his current location and he 
obtained his current job. (Tr. 73, 74) Upon moving to his current state, he and his wife 
lived in a motel for six weeks before purchasing a 32-foot 2006 recreational vehicle (RV) 
for $6,500. (Tr. 76, 77) The RV is currently their home and they pay $400 monthly for lot 
rental. (Tr. 58, 76) The RV has been paid off. His 1996 Chevrolet is paid for and they 
are current on his wife’s Ford pickup truck payments.  
  
 In August 2006, after having been laid off from his job of ten years, Applicant and 
his wife sought Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. (Ex. 6) Approximately $280,000 of 
unsecured debt was discharged. (Tr. 55) The discharged debt included approximately 
$135,000 for a real estate foreclosure, $64,000 on two automobile deficiencies, and 
approximately $13,000 on a tractor loan deficiency. (Ex. 6, Tr. 61) In December 2006, 
the debts were discharged. (Ex. 2)  
 
 In 2006, Applicant obtained two cell phones (SOR 1. d, $522) and used them for 
three months. (Ex. 2) During his June 2010 personal subject interview, he stated he was 
responsible for the debt and intended to repay it. (Ex. 2) At the hearing, he asserted the 
account was paid in full when the cell phones were returned, and a few months after 
closing the account he was informed additional charges were made on the account. 
These charges were challenged over the phone, and he thought they had been 
removed from his account. 
 
 In December 2006, after the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant purchased a used 
2003 Ford Focus for approximately $10,000. (Ex. 4, 5) The $293 monthly payments 
were made on the account until October 2007, when Applicant was again terminated 
from work. (Ex. 3, Tr. 36, 45) The vehicle was repossessed and sold leaving a balance 
due of $8,434 (SOR 1.b). When questioned about this debt during his 2006 interview, 
he stated he believed this debt was included and discharged in his Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. (Ex. 2) In his December 2011 response to interrogatories, he stated he had 
no knowledge of this account.  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant’s wife stated they learned in 2008, from someone at the 
automobile dealership who informed them that the car resold following repossession for 
more than what they owed on the vehicle. (Tr. 37) No documentation supporting this 
assertion was received. They believed the sale following the repossession had paid the 
debt owned on the vehicle. (Tr. 47) Following the repossession, Applicant has had no 
contact with the dealership. No demand for payment was made. (Tr. 47) The debt has 
been included in his debt repayment agreement. (Ex. A, B) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 In May 2007, again following the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant purchased a 
new $15,692 Chevrolet Aveo2 with $397 monthly payments. (Ex. 4, 5, Tr. 35) In July 
2008, Applicant made his last payment. The vehicle was repossessed, sold, and a 
balance due $5,115 (SOR 1.c) remained unpaid. In his 2010 personal subject interview, 
he stated he had no knowledge of the collection account and did not believe it was his 
debt. (Ex. 2) In his December 2011 response to interrogatories, he stated he had no 
knowledge of this account.  
 
 A collection firm (SOR 1.a) is attempting to collect a $971 debt for telephone 
service. (Ex. 3) This debt was not discussed during his June 2010 personal subject 
interview because it first became delinquent in July 2010. (Ex. 3) The collection agency 
agreed to settle this debt for $486, and it has been paid. (Ex. A, B, Tr. 27)  
 
 Applicant is living within his means, paying his monthly bills, and is receiving no 
calls or letters from creditors demanding payment. He is working six and seven days a 
week to meet his financial obligations. (Tr. 39) In the two years at their current location, 
he has not had any financial deficiencies. (Tr. 40) He has a 2003 Ford pickup and a 
1996 Chevrolet. (Tr. 57) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
2
 The manufactures suggested list price on the base model of this car is $12,000. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. In 2006, Applicant resorted to 
bankruptcy protection after his job of ten years with the automobile industry was 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
terminated. Following his bankruptcy, he incurred four charged-off or collection debts, 
which totaled $15,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Because Applicant has four delinquent debts and his financial problems are 
continuing in nature, he receives minimal application of the mitigating condition listed in 
AG ¶ 20(a). Additionally, the debts are recent since they were incurred following his 
December 2006 bankruptcy discharge of debts and are still being addressed.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant was substantially affected by circumstances beyond 
his control. In January 2006, his job of ten years with a major automobile manufacturer 
ended as the economy slowed. In 2006, he was unemployed for seven months, which 
led to his August 2006 filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. In December 2006, 
Applicant’s debts were discharged, and he received a fresh start. Starting in August 
2006, he had a variety of jobs which ended during 2009. His jobs lasted less than a year 
each. Due to his loss of employment he was homeless for seven or eight months before 
obtaining his current job. These are factors beyond his control.  
 
In determining if Applicant has acted appropriately, his actions since being 
questioned about his finances must be evaluated. In June 2010, he was asked about 
the two vehicle collection accounts. He assumed one was included in his 2006 
bankruptcy and did not recognize the other. He made no payment on these accounts 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
until after receiving the SOR. He receives only partial application under AG & 20(b) 
because he could have done more to verify the debts, and he should have started his 
payments earlier.  
 
Applicant should have received some financial counseling through his bankruptcy 
and the four debts are part of a debt repayment program. Other than the four SOR 
debts, he has no other delinquent debt. His monthly bills, including the monthly payment 
on his wife’s pickup truck are all being made in a timely manner. His financial problems 
are under control. AG & 20(c) applies.  
 
The four debts are included in a repayment plan on which Applicant has been 
making monthly payments since March 2012. Three months of payments is not a large 
track record, but he has made sufficient payments to provide assurance that he will 
continue making payments to the plan. AG & 20(d) does not apply because some of the 
SOR debts remain unpaid. 
 
Even though Applicant disputes two debts, (SOR 1.b) stating the vehicle was 
sold by the dealership for more than they owed and the cell phone charges were 
disputed (SOR 1.d), AG & 20(e) does not apply. Applicant failed to provide written 
documentation supporting the disputes.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred do not show 
Applicant was living beyond his means. In 2006, he purchased a 2003 Ford and in 2007 
purchased a Chevrolet. The other two debts totaling approximately $1,500 are for cell 
phone service. The debts were not for luxuries and are not the type that indicates poor 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. It does 
not appear the money was frivolously spent.  
 
Applicant has made sufficient payments to provide assurance that he will 
continue making payments to the plan. The concept of “meaningful track record” 
includes evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an 
applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in 
the SOR. All that is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan to 
resolve his delinquent debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan, 
which he has. Applicant’s entire financial situation and the actions he has taken must be 
evaluated to determine if the plan is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that 
a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a 
reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there 
is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt 
plan be the ones listed in the SOR. The repayment agreement included all four SOR 
debts and the monthly amount to pay the plan is automatically debited from his account. 
AG & 20(d) applies. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) All four SOR delinquent accounts are being addressed in a repayment plan. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1. d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
