1The file copy of the SOR is undated.  The July date comes from the Decision at 2.
KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Judge’s finding that Applicant probably did not owe the deficiency resulting from the
foreclosure sale of her home was not based upon substantial record evidence.  Even if a debt is
unenforceable under state law, a Judge must still consider the underlying circumstances. 
Favorable decision remanded.  
CASE NO: 10-07393.a1
DATE: 06/12/2012
DATE: June 12, 2012
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-07393
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Julian Roberts, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On or about July 12, 2011,1 DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising
Applicant of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 16, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge
Michael H. Leonard granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(c): “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(d): “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts[.]” 
2
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his
findings of fact and whether the Judge’s favorable security clearance decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we remand.  
Facts  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: In 2007, Applicant purchased a
house in a community about 55 miles from her residence, though in the same state.  She purchased
it as a future retirement home and, pending retirement, she used it as rental property.  She financed
the purchase with first and second mortgage loans, both from the same lender.  Her rental efforts did
not result in a positive cash flow, and she sometimes had no renters at all.  
In 2010, both loans were more than 120 days late, and she had past-due balances.  She
attempted to work out a modification, and hired a lawyer to assist in this effort.  The lender placed
her in a trial period, during which she was required to make increased payments, but she was not
able to continue.  By March 2011, the first loan was in foreclosure and the second was past due (the
lender subsequently charged off this loan.)  The foreclosure sale resulted in a sales price
substantially lower than the amount owed on the loan.  Applicant has received no notice or
paperwork to the effect that she owes the deficiency.  The Judge took administrative notice that
Applicant’s house is in a state with an anti-deficiency statute, meaning that the lender may not seek
satisfaction of the deficiency from Applicant’s other assets.   
The SOR alleged three other debts.  Applicant has paid one of them in full, settled another,
and has established a repayment plan for the third.  Her current financial situation is stable.  She
provides assistance to an elderly father and to a disabled adult nephew.  
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant had mitigated the security concerns
arising from the three debts that had been resolved or were in the process of resolution.  He also
stated that “it is most probable that she owes nothing more on the loans under the state’s
antideficiency statute.” Decision at 7.  He concluded that, given these circumstances, Applicant’s
financial problems are either resolved or are under control2  and that she has demonstrated a good-
faith effort to pay her creditors.3  He concluded Applicant had met her burden of persuasion
regarding mitigation.
Discussion
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913
4This statement is located in the Analysis rather than in the Findings section of the Decision.  We will treat
a finding as such regardless of where it appears in the Decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-23829 at 3 (App. Bd.
Apr. 27, 2007).  
3
F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the Government presents
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those
concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  In rendering a final decision, an “agency must examine the
relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for” the decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The standard applicable in security clearance
decisions “is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, the Board will review
the Judge's decision to determine whether: it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).
Department Counsel contends that the Judge’s finding that Applicant probably has no further
liability on the two mortgages due to the operation of state law is erroneous.4  We examine a Judge’s
findings to determine if they are supported by substantial record evidence, that is, “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 11-00970 at 2
(App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).  
The Judge’s favorable decision was based, in large measure, upon this challenged  finding.
However, the record contains no evidence to support it.  Applicant did not raise the issue of state
law, testifying only that she did not believe that she owed the money, “but if [the lender] produce[s]
anything that I do, I will pay it.”  Tr. at 61.  Her response to the SOR asserts that both mortgage
debts had been extinguished, but it does not specify her reason for thinking so–antideficiency statute,
debt forgiveness by lender, etc.  Response to SOR, September 1, 2011, at 4.  Neither did Applicant’s
attorney raise the issue during the hearing.  In any event, the Judge’s having taken notice of an
unspecified antideficiency statute, in and of itself, is not sufficient to demonstrate that Applicant’s
circumstances are such that the two mortgage debts had been discharged by operation of law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09480 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2010).  Neither is there any evidence to
demonstrate that an anti-deficiency statute has been specifically applied to the mortgages or that the
lender had forgiven these debts.  The Judge’s finding that Applicant “most probably” does not owe
the deficiency is not supported by substantial record evidence.
4
Department Counsel also argues that the Judge’s mitigation analysis was flawed.  He
contends that the Judge’s unsustainable finding that Applicant probably did not owe the mortgage
debts resulted in an oversimplified decision, one which did not take into account the totality of the
record evidence.  We find this argument persuasive.  The Judge’s analysis did not address the
circumstances underlying Applicant’s mortgage debt, nor the sufficiency of her response to that
debt.  A security clearance proceeding is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness.  Even if a delinquent debt is unenforceable under state law, a Judge must
consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to
satisfy the debt in a timely manner.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27,
2003).  As it stands, the Decision fails to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its ultimate holding.
 See ISCR Case No. 03-22861, supra.  Accordingly, we remand the case to the Judge for a new
decision, consistent with the above.
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is REMANDED.    
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
SEPARATE OPINION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE MICHAEL Y. RA’ANAN
I concur with my colleagues in their analysis of the errors below.  I differ only on the matter
of disposition.  Applicant has failed to meet her burden as to mitigation.  Therefore, I conclude that
the case should be reversed.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
