 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09789  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the financial 
considerations guideline. Her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on June 30, 2010, to request a security clearance required as part of her 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). On March 7, 2012, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. The SOR listed security concerns 
 
2 
 
 
addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). In her Answer 
to the SOR, dated March 15, 2012, Applicant admitted 16 of 17 allegations, and 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 4) 
 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)1 in support of 
the Government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request. The FORM was 
forwarded to Applicant on April 26, 2012, and she received it on May 8, 2012. She was 
given 30 days from that date to file a response. Applicant did not submit a response. 
The case was assigned to me on June 29, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations listed in the SOR are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After reviewing the pleadings and the FORM, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 25 years of age. She is single and has one child, three years of age. 
She earned an associate’s degree in business administration in 2007, and attended 
college for one additional year. (Item 5) 
 
 While attending college, Applicant worked part-time as a sales associate and as 
a receptionist. After college, she worked full-time as an accounts clerk. In June 2010, 
she began her current position as an administrative assistant for a defense contractor. 
In her September 2011 response to a DOHA interrogatory, Applicant stated that her 
delinquencies began in 2005, while she was in college, when she was 18 to 21 years of 
age. She notes that she became more responsible after her daughter’s birth, but the 
debts had already accumulated. When she began working full-time, she used her 
modest salary to pay daily living expenses. (Items 4 - 6) 
 
 The debts listed in the SOR, which total $63,800, appear in Applicant's credit 
reports of July and December 2010, September 2011, and February 2012. In her 
interrogatory response, Applicant stated that she has made arrangements for a $100 
per month payment plan on a $1,652 SOR debt, and a $50-per-month plan on another 
debt; reduced a cable bill from $1,165 to $290; received a settlement offer on one debt; 
and planned to consolidate several student loans. She did not provide proof of these 
claims. Applicant also disputed the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d, stating that it is a 
duplicate of the debt alleged at ¶ 1.b. She also believes that the debt at ¶1.l is a 
duplicate of the debt at ¶ 1.h. However, she did not provide documentation supporting 
these claims, or showing that she has disputed the debts with the credit agencies. She 
intends to pay her delinquent debts. Applicant did not state that she has had financial 
counseling. The file does not include information about Applicant's current salary, 
expenses, or budget. (Items 4, 6 – 10)  
 
                                                          
1
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 - 8) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
2
 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. As of the date of the SOR, she had 
past-due debts totaling more than $63,000. Her history of failing to meet her financial 
obligations supports the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions can potentially mitigate security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s debts started to become delinquent seven years ago. However, they 
are recent, because they are still delinquent. Her unresolved financial situation casts 
doubt on her judgment and reliability, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 Applicant states that she initiated payment plans on several SOR debts. 
However, she provided no documentary evidence to confirm that she has established 
payment plans, or any proof that she has made payments. Other than unsupported 
statements that she will work on her debts, she offered no evidence of concrete efforts 
to resolve them. The record does not contain sufficient evidence to show Applicant has 
made a good-faith effort to resolve her debts, and her finances are not under control. 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
5 
 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Over the past seven years, Applicant has accrued more than $63,000 in 
delinquent debt. She was put on notice that delinquent debts are a security concern 
when she completed her security clearance application in June 2010, and again during 
her security interview in July 2010. Applicants are not required to be debt-free; however, 
they are expected to develop a plan to resolve their debts, and provide evidence of 
actions to implement that plan. To date, Applicant has provided no evidence of a 
credible plan to deal with the SOR debts, or evidence that she has begun making 
payments on them.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows that 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about her suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
