 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 10-03193 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 9, 2010, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On October 3, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 26, 2011. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On January 13, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing Items 1 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
through 6, was provided to the Applicant on February 4, 2012. He was given the 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not file a response to the FORM within the 30-day time allowed that would 
have expired on March 3, 2012. I received the case assignment on June 7, 2012, after 
the file was reassigned from another administrative judge due to caseload 
considerations. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Afghanistan. The request and the attached documents are 
Items 7 to 13. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, 
below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraph 1.e, 1.i, 1.j, and 1o, and he 
admitted all other allegations from 1.a to 1.k. (Items 1, 2)  
 
Applicant is 48 years old, divorced from his first wife, and now married to his 
second wife. His current wife was born in Afghanistan and is an Afghan citizen. They 
were married in 2007. Applicant denied this allegation, but did not present any 
documentation to contradict it. Applicant was born in Afghanistan and came to the 
United States in December 1991. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in February 
2001. He has a child who was born in the United States in 1999. He works as a linguist 
for a defense contractor and has done so since August 2007. (Items 3-6) 
 
Applicant’s mother is a resident and citizen of Afghanistan. Applicant is in contact 
with her at least monthly. He sends her $200-400 monthly to help support her. (Items 4-
6) 
 
Applicant has two brothers, who reside in Afghanistan and are citizens of that 
country. He has contact with them about every two months.  Applicant has two other 
brothers, who are citizens of Afghanistan and reside in Germany. Applicant 
communicates with them about every three to six months. At one time one of these 
brothers worked for the German government managing a refugee camp. Now he is a 
car dealer.  A fifth brother is an Afghan citizen. He lives in the United States and sells 
car parts for a living. (Items 4-6) 
 
Applicant has one sister, who resides in Afghanistan where she is a citizen. She 
is a teacher employed by the Afghanistan government. Applicant has contact with her 
every two weeks. Applicant has a second sister, who is a citizen and resident of 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Afghanistan. She is a school principal employed by the Afghanistan Department of 
Education. Her husband is a general in the Afghan Army. Applicant has contact with him 
about every six weeks. The general knows Applicant is a linguist working for the United 
States. (Items 4-6) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-law, and brother-in-law are residents and 
citizens of Afghanistan. Applicant has contact with his father-in-law monthly. The father-
in-law is a colonel in the Afghan Army. (Items 4-6) 
 
Applicant has a friend, who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. The friend is 
Applicant’s co-worker. Applicant has two nephews, one of whom resides on Germany. 
Both are citizens of Afghanistan. The second nephew lives in Afghanistan. Applicant 
last had contact with them in 2007. (Items 4-6) 
 
Applicant provided financial support to most of his family when they lived in exile 
as refugees in Pakistan from the mid-1990s to 2001. Applicant sent them $660 to $700 
monthly. (Item 6) 
 
Applicant did not submit any financial information about himself. He did not offer 
any character statements from co-workers about his duty performance or competency in 
his employment. He did not request a personal hearing so his credibility cannot be 
evaluated. 
 
Afghanistan  
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Afghanistan documents.  
Afghanistan is a country in southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east and the 
south.  Iran borders it on the west and Russia in the north.  It is a rugged and 
mountainous country, which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. It 
has about 18 million people. Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic that has had a 
turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Russians in 1979.  After an 
Accord was reached in 1989 and Russia withdrew from the country, fighting continued 
among the various ethnic, clan and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban 
rose to power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive 
policies. In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in 
the country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
Government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. The 
country’s human rights record remains poor and violence is rampant. According to 
recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks 
and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are 
ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. The U.S. 
Department of State Human Rights 2010 Report states that 20 schools were attacked 
from March to October 200 and 126 students killed by the Taliban. Teachers are 
threatened by the Taliban. (Items 7-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant lives with his wife, who is a legal resident of the United States but a 
citizen of Afghanistan. Two of Applicant’s brothers live in Afghanistan, as do two sisters. 
His mother to whom he sends several hundred dollars monthly for her support lives in 
Afghanistan. Applicant speaks to various members of his immediate family anywhere 
from every two weeks to every six months. Two brothers live in Germany while retaining 
Afghan citizenship. Living in Afghanistan creates a heightened risk for his relatives 
because they are in teaching and the Afghan army, primary targets of the Taliban 
insurgent attacks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 Applicant’s sisters are teachers in the Afghan school system, operated by the 
government. Teachers are a target of the Taliban fighters. One sister is married to a 
general in the Afghan Army, who is aware of Applicant’s current employment.  
 
 Applicant’s two nephews are citizens of Afghanistan. One resides there and one 
lives in Germany.  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is a colonel in the Afghan army. He resides in 
Afghanistan and is a citizen of that country.    
   
 Applicant’s mother lives in Afghanistan and is a citizen of that country. He has 
contact with her.  
 
 The family members who reside in Afghanistan and work in the schools and the 
military raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (c) because of the heightened 
risk caused by their work.  
 
AG ¶ 8 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.1 
 
 Applicant’s siblings and their husbands live in Afghanistan, the U.S., or Germany. 
Afghanistan raises a security concern because of the Taliban insurgency. The security 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
situation in Afghanistan is tenuous, according to the U.S. State Department. Applicant’s 
connection to his educator sisters, who are in a profession targeted by the Taliban, 
could place Applicant in a position to have to choose between that relationship and his 
duty to the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law (a colonel) and brother-in-law (a general) are officers in 
the Afghan army. The general knows about Applicant’s employment. Their positions 
during the insurgency place them in risky positions. Applicant could be placed in a 
position to choose between them and the interests of the U.S. 
 
 Applicant’s mother living in Afghanistan could also cause a conflict of interest if 
she were pressured to compromise Applicant’s situation. Two brothers and two sisters 
in Afghanistan create a great potential for pressure and coercion against Applicant. 
Their physical presence creates the potential that their safety could be threatened to the 
point that Applicant would confront a choice between their interest and those of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(a) has no application to any of the above relatives.  
 
 Applicant did not establish that he has such deep and longstanding relationships 
in the United States when contrasted with the number of relatives living and working in 
Afghanistan in the military and schools, and his support of his mother. Applicant did not 
provide any information on his assets in the United States or in any other part of the 
world. His child was born in the United States but that is not enough to overcome the 
concerns raised by his relatives in Afghanistan. It is not evident from his written 
statements that he will resolve any conflict of interest between family members living in 
Afghanistan in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
 Contact by Applicant with his relatives in Afghanistan is not casual or infrequent 
so there is a risk of foreign influence. His maternal financial support shows his contact is 
not casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
Several factors weigh against granting Applicant a security clearance. First, there 
is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights abuses in Afghanistan. More 
importantly for security purposes, terrorists hostile to the United States actively seek 
classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could attempt to use 
Applicant’s mother and sisters, along with the military officer relatives, to obtain such 
information. Second, his family members with whom he maintains frequent contact are 
resident citizens of Afghanistan. 
 
The Directive provides that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” (AG 
¶ 2 (b))  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.g, and 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k: Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
