KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Hearing Office decisions are not binding on the Appeal Board or on other Hearing
Office Judges.  Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s circumstances suggested a lack of financial
restraint is sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 10-05738.a1
DATE: 06/26/2012
DATE: June 26, 2012
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-05738
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 14, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On March 9, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm the Judge’s decision.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant served in the U.S. Navy
from 1980 until 2003, retiring as a Lieutenant Commander.  He held a security clearance in the Navy
without incident.  He has worked as a Government contractor for the last three years.
Applicant began accruing real estate while he was on active duty.  He bought a second home
and rented out his first, and then acquired a third property.  He also purchased a yacht and lived on
it for a period of time.  From 2003 until 2007, he acquired seven additional properties, although he
did not own them all at the same time.  He bought four of them as investments.  
In 2007, Applicant had an account with a credit union.  This account had a balance of several
hundred thousand dollars, which was a cash reserve to be tapped in the event of financial difficulty.
He had a line of credit with the same credit union.  In late 2007, the credit union transferred the
funds in Applicant’s account to pay off his line of credit, with the result that Applicant found himself
unable to pay all of his mortgage obligations.   
He sold five of his rental properties, but as the economy got worse, found himself unable to
sell the others.  He attempted short sales, but the lender did not accept the offers.  Seven or eight of
Applicant’s properties went into foreclosure.
In January 2010, Applicant filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.  The filing listed
$73,000 in unsecured priority claims, $544,558 in unsecured non-priority claims, and $5,905,968
in secured claims.  The unsecured priority claims consisted of property tax liabilities.  He has
submitted a reorganization plan to the bankruptcy court and has completed credit counseling.  
Among the debts listed in the bankruptcy filing is Applicant’s home, valued at about $1.5
million but upon which he owed $3.36 million.  The filing also includes the yacht, a private airplane,
and three cars, two of them luxury models.  He also owes $193,139 to the Internal Revenue Service
for taxes owed from December 2005 to December 2009.  Applicant’s financial condition includes
a number of delinquent debts for utility services, cable services, etc.  
Applicant received a number of awards and medals while on active duty.  He has received
several accolades for the quality of his work performance and service to his country.  His and his
wife’s combined annual income was between $200,000 and $250,000.  
In the Analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant’s financial difficulties were partially the
result of the poor economy.  However, she also concluded that he bore responsibility himself, in
view of what she characterized as “his poor judgement in acquiring an excessive amount of debt.”
Decision at 9.  She stated that, under the circumstances, she could not conclude that Applicant had
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  
2See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-07196 (App. Bd. Dec. 30, 2011).  Applicant cites to a statement in this decision
that a debtor’s bankruptcy action provided a clear indication that his financial problems were under control.
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(a): “the behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”   The only evidence
of this event came from Applicant himself.  There is insufficient record evidence about this matter to have enabled the
Judge to draw a conclusion one way or another as to the purported uniqueness of Applicant’s financial circumstances.
3
acted responsibly in regard to his debts.1  Although bankruptcy is a legally permissible remedy, she
stated that Applicant had not, as of the close of the record, demonstrated a track record of debt
repayment.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge credited Applicant for his military service and
the respect he enjoys from his colleagues and friends.  However, she stated that there is little
indication that he will regain financial stability in the near future and that his bankruptcy plan had
yet to be approved as of the close of the record.  She also concluded that Applicant had not
demonstrated the restraint to live within his means.  The Judge concluded that the evidence left her
with doubts as to Applicant’s security worthiness.  Accordingly, she denied him a clearance.  
Applicant cites to some cases by the Hearing Office, which he contends support his effort
to obtain a security clearance.  These cases pertain to applicants whose financial problems originated
from circumstances beyond their control and whom the Judges concluded had acted responsibly in
regard to their debts or had otherwise demonstrated that their finances were under control.2  We give
due consideration to these cases.  However, as Applicant himself notes, Hearing Office cases are not
binding on other Hearing Office Judges nor on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-
09236 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 15, 2011).  The cases which Applicant has cited have significant factual
differences from his own.  For example, in the one cited in the footnote below, the circumstances
of that applicant’s debts were qualitatively different from those of Applicant in this case.  The cases
which Applicant cites do not demonstrate that the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.    
   Applicant contends that the Judge erred in her application of the mitigating conditions.  He
cites to evidence concerning his credit union account having been involuntarily depleted to pay off
a line of credit.  He states that his financial problems were triggered by this unique event, which is
unlikely to recur.3  Although the Judge considered this evidence and made a finding about it, her
analysis relied in substantial measure on record evidence of the circumstances of Applicant’s
massive debt load, his having purchased numerous houses, as well as expensive cars, a boat, an
airplane, etc.  She stated that Applicant’s circumstances suggest a lack of financial restraint.  Such
a lack of restraint is consistent with a conclusion that Applicant’s circumstances cast doubt on his
judgement.  She also concluded that Applicant’s debt problems did not arise fundamentally from
causes outside his control.  Given the record that was before her, this conclusion is sustainable.
Much of Applicant’s argument on appeal simply takes issue with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence.  However, the record as a whole provides no reason to question the manner in which the
Judge weighed the evidence.  
4
Applicant argues that his bankruptcy action demonstrates that he is doing everything he can
to address his financial delinquencies.  However, as stated above, the Judge relied to a large extent
on evidence of the circumstances of Applicant’s having acquired such a massive debt load.  She
concluded that these circumstances impugn Applicant’s judgement and self-control, and that, in any
event, his bankruptcy action had not sufficiently progressed so as to permit a reasoned conclusion
that Applicant’s problems were on the way to resolution.  The record supports a conclusion that the
Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
