 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05715 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 20, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns that arose out of his criminal activities 
during the period of 1991 through 2008. He has not committed any criminal offenses 
since 2008. He also mitigated the concerns over his alcohol consumption. He has not 
consumed alcohol since 2007. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 26, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 28, 2012, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on April 26, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 15.  GE 
1 through GE 3, and GE 5 through GE 15 were admitted without objection. Applicant 
objected to GE 4 because it was not self-authenticating, but it was admitted over his 
objection because it was attached to a letter authenticating the document. (Tr. 24-25.) 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, called one witness, and offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through H, which were admitted without objection. The record was left open until close 
of business May 10, 2012, for receipt of additional documentation. On May 2, 2012, 
Applicant submitted two additional documents marked AE I and AE J. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE I and AE J, and they were admitted. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 4, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor, by which he has 
been employed since 2007. He is married and has two children, ages 3 and 4, and two 
step-children, ages 19 and 11. (Tr. 61, 38-41.)   
 
 In the SOR, the Government alleged that Applicant was arrested and/or cited for 
criminal and vehicle code violations at least 15 times during the period of 1991 through 
2008. His convictions include four incidents of driving after under the influence of 
alcohol. Applicant admits each of the allegations with respect to his criminal record and 
his alcohol consumption, as listed on the SOR. (Answer.) His criminal record is as 
follows. 
 
 In January 1991 Applicant was arrested and charged with Receiving Stolen 
Property and Theft. Applicant’s friend stole athletic apparel including tennis shoes from 
a warehouse. Applicant permitted his friend to store the stolen goods at his home. 
Applicant pled guilty to Receiving Stolen Property and was sentenced to 15 months of 
probation, fines and costs, and five days of incarceration. (GE 5; GE 14; Tr. 55.) 
 
 In May 1991 Applicant was charged with Operating Auto Without Owner’s 
Consent. In Applicant’s March 31, 2010 interview with an authorized agent of the 
Department of Defense, Applicant indicated that he “stole a car with a friend . . . and 
took it joyriding.” However, at hearing Applicant testified that he did not steal the vehicle, 
but that his friends picked him up in a stolen vehicle. Police records reflect that at the 
time of arrest, Applicant was in the driver’s seat of the vehicle. Applicant was found 
guilty, placed on probation for three years, required to pay court costs of $30 and 
restitution of $250, and was placed on electronic surveillance for 30 days. (GE 1; GE 
14; Tr. 56.) 
 
 In August 1991 Applicant was arrested and charged with Burglary. Applicant 
claimed that he and a friend found a purse in an ally. While they were allegedly going 
through the purse to find the owner’s identification, the owner of the purse saw them 
and called the police. Applicant and his friend took money from the purse and spent it. 
 
3 
 
Applicant was arrested and charged. He did not recall the outcome of this charge. (GE 
13; GE 14; Tr. 58.) 
 
 In March 1992 Applicant was arrested and charged with Burglary. Applicant was 
unable to recall the details of this incident. (GE 13; GE 14; Tr. 58.) 
 
 In March 1992 Applicant was arrested and charged with Criminal Damage to 
Property, Party to a Crime, and Theft.  Applicant and two other individuals broke a 
window of a store, entered the store, and stole three packs of cigarettes. Applicant was 
19 years old at the time of this incident. (GE 6; Tr. 59.) 
 
  In September 1992 Applicant was charged with Criminal Trespass to Dwellings. 
Applicant entered a residence of another person, after kicking in the door. (GE 7; Tr. 
60.) 
 
 In 1994 or 1995 Applicant was charged with Driving While Under the Influence of 
an Intoxicant (DWI). Applicant was returning home after drinking with friends and was 
arrested for DWI. As a result of this arrest, Applicant was fined and placed on probation. 
(GE 14.) 
 
 In 1996 Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI and Operating Motor 
Vehicle after Revocation. He testified that he does not recall the details surrounding this 
incident. Applicant was found guilty and sentenced to serve 120 days in the House of 
Corrections for DWI, consecutively with six months in the House of Corrections for 
Operating Motor Vehicle after Revocation. Applicant was referred to the council on 
alcoholism and drug dependence where he completed a mandatory assessment. 
Following the completion of his assessment, Applicant participated in an outpatient 
treatment program and attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, according to court 
records. The record is void of any diagnosis during this treatment. (GE 2; GE 14; Tr. 60, 
63.)  
 
 In 1996 Applicant was arrested and charged with Escape from Custody Pursuant 
to Legal Arrest for a Crime. Applicant was serving his sentence for his 1996 DUI in the 
House of Corrections, but he was granted work release. One night, he chose to go out 
drinking with his friends instead of returning to jail for the evening. Applicant was 
arrested a few days later. In January 1997 he was found guilty and sentenced to serve 
one year and one day in prison. Applicant testified he actually only served a quarter-of-
a-year of this sentence in prison. (GE 3; GE 13; GE 14; Tr. 63-69.) 
 
 In June 1997 Applicant was cited for Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. The 
police had been called to his residence during a domestic dispute. Applicant “neglected 
to hide a marijuana pipe” and the police viewed it in plain sight. Applicant was cited. 
Applicant was intoxicated at the time of this incident. He was found guilty by default 
when he failed to appear in court on this charge. A forfeiture of $283.30 was imposed. 
Applicant failed to pay the fine and an order was sent to the Department of 
Transportation to suspend Applicant’s driving privileges for a period of two years. (GE 4; 
GE 14; Tr. 71-72.) 
 
4 
 
 
 In 1999 Applicant was charged with DWI (3rd), and Operating Motor Vehicle after 
Revocation (5th). Applicant was driving home after becoming intoxicated at a party. 
Applicant pled guilty to both counts and was sentenced to serve 11 months in the 
House of Corrections, consecutive to any other sentence, with credit for 7 days served 
for DWI. He was placed in a work release program. He was sentenced to serve 30 days 
in the House of Corrections for Operating Motor Vehicle after Revocation (5th), 
consecutively with his sentence for DWI. (GE 8; GE 14; Tr. 73-74.) 
 
 In 2002 Applicant was arrested and charged with Operating While Intoxicated 
(4th), and Operating Motor Vehicle after Revocation(6th). Applicant had been consuming 
alcohol at the home of a female friend. He “knew he’d had too much to drink, but 
decided to drive home anyway.” He was stopped by the police on his way home and 
was arrested. Applicant had a blood ethanol concentration of 0.166% at the time of 
arrest. This amount exceeded the state level for intoxication. He was found guilty and 
sentenced to confinement in the county jail for 175 days, required to complete an 
alcohol assessment, pay fines and costs. He did not complete the assessment until 
2008, as detailed, below. (GE 9; GE 15.) 
 
 From 1995 through 2002 Applicant was convicted for violating numerous motor 
vehicle violations. These offenses include a 2002 Non-registration of Vehicle citation; a 
1997 citation for Exceeding Speed Zones; a 1995 citation for Operating After 
Suspension or Revocation; a 1995 citation for Non-Registration of Vehicle; and a 1996 
citation for Fail/Obey Traffic Officer Signal/Order. (GE 10; Tr. 75.) 
 
 In November 2007 Applicant was arrested and charged with Corporal Injury to 
Spouse/Cohabitant. Applicant and his wife were arguing over finances and Applicant’s 
use of alcohol. The argument escalated and Applicant shoved his wife. Applicant left his 
home and called the police from a nearby pay phone. Applicant was arrested and 
remained in custody for three days. He pled not guilty to the charges and they were 
eventually dismissed. (GE 13; GE 14; Tr. 44-45, 81-86.) 
 
 In July 2008 Applicant was arrested and charged with Corporal Injury to 
Spouse/Cohabitant and Cruelty to Child by Endangering Health. In Applicant’s March 
31, 2010 interview with an authorized agent of the Department of Defense, Applicant 
indicated that prior to his arrest, he had been drinking and was arguing with his wife 
about money and his ongoing use of alcohol. His wife claimed he bit her. His step-son 
intervened in their dispute and Applicant shoved him. Applicant’s wife called the police 
and he was arrested. Applicant’s wife and step-son did not pursue charges and the 
case was dismissed. (GE 11; GE 13; GE 14; Tr. 46-47, 92.) 
 
 Applicant has consumed alcohol in excess and to the point of intoxication. He 
began drinking alcohol at the age of 17. From age 17 to age 21, he consumed 6 to 12 
beers per sitting 3 to 4 times a week. He would drink until he could not walk. “I had to 
drink, and drink, and drink until I would pass out,” he testified. He explained that he 
grew up in a family with an alcoholic single mother and an alcoholic father that rarely 
provided Applicant support. He testified that on several occasions, he made half-
 
5 
 
hearted attempts to stop drinking alcohol, but that he went “right back to [drinking]” each 
time. He attended some Alcoholic Anonymous meetings, but did not find them helpful. 
(Tr. 62-63, 80-81.) 
 
 In February 2006 Applicant met his wife in an on-line game. He confided in her 
about his desires to stop drinking. She had been previously married to an alcoholic and 
understood the challenges of helping an alcoholic become sober. In March 2006, 
Applicant moved out-of-state to get a fresh start with his wife (then girlfriend). His level 
of alcohol consumption decreased after his move, but it did not stop until November 
2007. His wife testified that in November of 2007, she and Applicant had the above 
mentioned altercation. Around that same time, Applicant had passed out in their back 
yard after becoming heavily intoxicated. He decided that from that point forward he 
would stop consuming alcohol because he did not want to lose his family. When he 
awoke in his yard, he prayed for the strength to permanently abstain from alcohol. He 
has not consumed any alcohol since that date. He recognizes that he has made 
“numerous mistakes and bad decisions” in his life but believes that he has permanently 
changed. Applicant started attending church immediately after giving up alcohol. They 
do not have alcohol in their home. Applicant’s wife further asserted that Applicant was 
not drinking at the time of his 2008 arrest, despite his statement to the investigator that 
he was intoxicated at the time of that incident. (AE H; Tr. 38-50; 94-97.)  
 
  From December 2008 through July 2009, Applicant met weekly with a licensed 
therapist. He was diagnosed with alcohol dependence. He learned how to prevent 
cravings and take action should they arise. Applicant’s therapist changed Applicant’s 
diagnosis to “Alcohol Dependence in Remission” in January 2009. Her notes indicate 
that at that time, “Patient remain[ed] sober since Nov. 2007” despite being stressed and 
angry at times. Applicant testified, and records show, that he and his wife also 
participated in marital counseling. (AE I; Tr. 93.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by co-workers and is rated as a “successful 
contributor” in his performance assessments. He has received three peer to peer 
recognition awards and two cash awards for his exceptional work performance. (AE A 
through AE G; AE J.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
 
6 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
7 
 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant has a history of at least 15 criminal and vehicle code violations during 
the period of 1991 through 2008. His admitted criminal activities include a number of 
serious offenses like theft, burglaries, receiving stolen property, and escape from 
custody, in addition to four alcohol-related driving offenses and two domestic disputes. 
His offenses give rise to concerns about Applicant’s judgment and reliability both 
because of the nature of the offenses and the quantity of criminal offenses. The 
aforementioned disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal behavior. However, his offenses occurred 
when he was less mature. Four years have passed since his last arrest, a domestic 
incident that was ultimately dismissed. Since 2006, he has married, become an active 
member of his church, and found meaningful employment with a government contractor. 
He moved away from the friends with whom he consumed alcohol and committed 
numerous crimes. He is now focused on being a good father to his two young children 
and two step-children. He has not consumed any alcohol since the domestic incident in 
November 2007. He has participated in alcohol counseling and marital counseling and 
now possesses tools to help him through stressful and upsetting situations without 
resorting to criminal activity. His wife and co-workers support Applicant’s application and 
speak highly of Applicant.  
 
 Due to the recent, positive changes in Applicant’s life, criminal conduct is unlikely 
to recur. He has demonstrated that he has successfully rehabilitated himself. He is 
remorseful about his past criminal activities, and has made significant efforts to change 
his life around. His past criminal behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Applicant has been arrested for driving while under the influence of alcohol four 
times. He has also had a number of other alcohol related arrests such as his 2007 
domestic incident with his wife, and his 1997 possession of drug paraphernalia charge, 
both of which occurred while Applicant was intoxicated. In addition, his Escape from 
Custody occurred as a result of Applicant’s desire to consume alcohol instead of 
returning to serve his sentence after his work release from incarceration. Applicant 
admitted to a long history of binge consumption to the point to passing out that 
extended from age 17 through 2006 when he was 34 years old. He was diagnosed by 
his licensed therapist as alcohol dependent. AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), and 22(e) are 
disqualifying. 
 
Two Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
 
9 
 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol related incident occurred in 2007. It has been over four 
years since he had any alcohol-related problems. He acknowledged his issues with 
alcohol and has remained abstinent for over four years. He sought treatment with a 
licensed therapist who diagnosed him with alcohol dependence in remission. He has 
learned tools, other than consuming alcohol, to deal with his frustrations. He is 
dedicated to being a father and providing for his children. Applicant’s past problems with 
alcohol are unlikely to recur given the new, positive influences and changes in his life. 
AG ¶ 23(a) and 23(b) are mitigating.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant performs well in his position at work and is a valued employee. The 
majority of his criminal conduct took place when he was much younger, from the ages 
of 17 to 34. Although his alcohol consumption carried on until 2007 and criminal conduct 
carried on until 2008, Applicant has not had any violations since 2008. He is now 
happily married and is involved in his church. He transformed his life because he did not 
want to lose his family and repeat the mistakes his father made with him. He has 
attended both alcohol counseling and marital counseling. His wife verified that Applicant 
has made permanent behavioral changes motivated by his love for his family. Applicant 
has demonstrated that there is little potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. Given Applicant has remained sober for over four years and has received a 
favorable prognosis by his therapist, there is a low likelihood of recurrence. 
 
10 
 
 Overall, the record evidence overcomes the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a~1.o:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a~2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
