 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-07976 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 28, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 12, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on April 18, 2012. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on April 20, 2012. 
Applicant received the FORM on May 9, 2012. He had 30 days to submit a response to 
the FORM. He timely submitted additional information which is admitted as Item 9. 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s additional information. The 
memorandum indicating Department Counsel’s response is admitted as Item 10. On 
June 1, 2012, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned to me 
on that same date.   
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.   
 
Administrative Correction 
 
 The SOR alleges two paragraph 1.b’s. I modified the second SOR ¶ 1.b to read 
SOR ¶ 1.bb.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old male employed by a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance.  He has been employed with the company since 
October 2004. From 1989 to 2003, he was a civil service employee. He was granted a 
confidential security clearance in the past. He divorced his first wife in May 2003. He 
married his current wife in January 2008. He has no children. (Item 5)   
 
After Applicant completed his most recent security clearance questionnaire on 
December 26, 2009, a background investigation was initiated. (Item 5) His background 
investigation revealed that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2001. His debts 
were discharged in January 2002. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 8 at 3) He currently has nine 
delinquent accounts, a total approximate balance of $50,426. The delinquent accounts 
include a $9,081 credit card account placed for collection in August 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.b: 
Item 7 at 1; Item 8 at 5); a $1,069 account placed for collection in May 2006 (SOR ¶ 
1.bb: Item 7 at 1-2; Item 8 at 13); a $1,000 account placed for collection in January 
2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 13); and a $1,401 account placed for collection 
in January 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 8 at 9). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $2,466 account placed for collection in 
October 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 8 at 9); a $1,263 account placed for collection in 
December 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 7 at 2); a $1,100 account placed for collection in 
December 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 7 at 3; Item 8 at 12, 14); a $31,689 debt as a result of 
an automobile repossession in 2005 that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 7 at 
3; Item 8 at 8); and a $1,657 account that was placed for collection in February 2006 
(SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 8 at 14). 
 
On June 21, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by the agent conducting his 
background investigation. They discussed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.bb, 1.c, 
1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. Applicant admitted that the debts belonged to him. He 
indicated the accounts became delinquent because he did not have the money to pay 
the debts. Applicant and his spouse encountered financial problems because they were 
spending more money than they were making. Applicant applied for his current job, 
which is located overseas, and has been earning a good income for the past several 
years. He intends to work overseas one more year and then move back the United 
States. He told the investigator he would work on settling his collection accounts when 
 
3 
 
 
he returns to the United States. He attempted to resolve his debts in 2004 by entering 
into an agreement with a debt consolidation company. He paid the company $300 a 
month for eight months, but discontinued the agreement when he discovered the 
company was not paying his debts. (Items 6 at 9-10)  
 
As of June 21, 2010, Applicant’s net monthly income was $6,200. His spouse’s 
net monthly income was $800. Their total net monthly income was $7,000. Their total 
monthly expenses were $2,350. Their monthly debt payments were $738. These 
payments did not include any of the debts listed in the SOR. Their total expenditures 
were $3,088. They have $3,912 left over each month. (Item 6 at 10-11) Applicant 
provided an updated wage and earnings statement covering the period November 12-
25, 2011. His net income for the two-week period was $3,616.35. His approximate net 
monthly income increased to $7,232. (Item 6 at 27)    
 
Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant resolved a 2003 tax debt which 
resulted from Applicant withdrawing his 401k account when he resigned from the civil 
service to make repairs on his home. This resulted in tax penalties. He paid $208 a 
month until the debt was resolved. (Item 6 at 11, 17-20) 
 
In his undated response to interrogatories, Applicant stated that he is making 
payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He seems to believe that he is not required 
to repay the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.bb, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g because they are 
charged off and the credit reports lists each debt as having a zero balance.  He claims 
that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i are the same debt and indicates that he is 
making payments on the debt. (Item 6 at 2-4)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant states that he has been working at an 
overseas location for five years. He would like to maintain his security clearance so that 
he can work overseas another five years. He indicates he has been paying towards the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He agreed to settle the $9,081 debt for $3,000. He provided 
no proof that payments were being made towards this debt. He attached a credit report, 
dated January 30, 2012. The credit report indicates that all of the debts alleged in the 
SOR have been charged off. Applicant maintains he owes nothing on the debts 
because the accounts are charged off and have a zero balance.  He is making 
payments towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. He provided a payment history which 
has been sporadic with the payments being a different amount each month. Between 
February 22, 2011, and March 9, 2012, he paid a total of $486.35 towards this $1,263 
debt. (Item 4: Response to SOR at 21-22) 
 
Although Applicant claims the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f and SOR ¶ 1.i are the 
same debt, I find the debts are not duplicates.  The account numbers do not match and 
the original creditor listed for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is different from the creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. (Item 4 at 8, 11)  
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant requests that the bankruptcy allegation 
be removed because it has been 12 years since he filed and he believes it is now 
 
4 
 
 
irrelevant. He states that he paid a $15,000 tax debt for tax year 2003 in October 2011. 
He paid two automobile loans in full and claims that he has no other outstanding bills. 
He hopes to retain his security clearance so he can continue to work overseas. (Item 9) 
The three debts which Applicant provided proof that he paid in response to the FORM 
are not alleged in the SOR. None of the debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c), (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a history of not meeting financial 
obligations. He filed for and received a discharge under Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
January 2002. In 2006, he encountered financial problems and has numerous 
delinquent debts. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. While 
Applicant paid some debts that are not alleged in the SOR and provided proof that he is 
making some payments towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, the remaining delinquent 
accounts are unresolved. Applicant has a long history of financial problems. He has 
worked overseas for the last five years and has sufficient income to apply towards his 
delinquent accounts. He took no steps to resolve these debts. Questions remain about 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because of Applicant’s 
2002 bankruptcy was filed just prior his divorce from his first wife. However, Applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
most recent financial problems resulted from Applicant and his current wife living above 
their means. In addition, for the past five years Applicant has had sufficient income to 
begin to resolve his delinquent debts, but has not taken steps to resolve the majority of 
his delinquent debts. Applicant has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances.  
      
 AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant has not received financial counseling. Although, it is likely that 
Applicant could have resolved a majority of the delinquent debts if he applied the $3,912 
left over each month in discretionary income to the debts, he chose not to do so. As a 
result his financial problems are unlikely to be resolved in the near future.   
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant provided sufficient proof that the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is being repaid. While he claims payments are being made 
towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, he provided no additional documents 
corroborating this assertion. Applicant made no attempt to resolve the other delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. He has not initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his debts.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment history with a defense contractor. I considered his divorce in 2003 may 
have had an impact on his financial situation which resulted in his 2002 bankruptcy.  
However, Applicant’s recent financial problems resulted from irresponsible spending. 
 
7 
 
 
Having earned a decent income for the past five years working at an overseas location, 
Applicant did not apply the extra income towards any of his delinquent debts.  
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations which 
raises questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. In other words, if an individual has trouble managing their 
finances, this can raise doubts about an individual’s ability to handle and protect 
classified information. Applicant’s history of financial problems raises doubts about his 
ability to handle and protect classified information. Mindful of my duty to resolve cases 
where there is doubt in favor of national security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the 
concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g – I.i:   Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
