 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06799 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence. Since 
2007, she participated in five chemical dependence treatment programs, and she 
relapsed after each treatment. Her most recent relapse occurred in April 2012. Applicant 
is receiving psychiatric treatment and medication for her depression, and she is doing 
better. Notwithstanding, it is too soon for Applicant to establish that she can control her 
alcoholism and depression. She failed to mitigate the Guideline G and E security 
concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 28, 2010. 
On January 6, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline G 
(Alcohol Consumption). The SOR was amended on February 15, 2012, adding two 
allegations under Guideline G, and two allegations under Guideline E (Personal 
 
2 
 
 
Conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR and the amended SOR on January 28, 2012 
and March 21, 2012, respectively, and she requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on April 3, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 20, 2012, convening a hearing for May 
8, 2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant 
testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 4. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 14, 2012. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On February 15, 2012, the Government moved to amend the SOR by adding 
subparagraphs 1. e and 1.f to SOR ¶ 1 (Alcohol Consumption), and by adding SOR ¶¶ 
2.a and 2.b (Personal Conduct). Appellant answered the amended SOR allegations on 
March 21, 2012. I granted the amendment as requested. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the six factual allegations under SOR ¶ 1. She denied the two 
allegations under SOR ¶ 2. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor and 
considered her testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old senior analyst working for a Government contractor. 
She was awarded a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in 2000. She married 
her spouse in 2000, they separated in June 2007, and their divorce became final in 
2009. She has a daughter, age nine, and a son, age seven, of this marriage.  
 
Appellant worked for another Government agency from 2000 until 2003. She was 
granted a secret security clearance in 2001, which she possessed until 2007. She 
worked for a Government contractor from 2003 until 2007, and her security clearance 
was continued during that period. In 2007, she stopped working for the Government 
contractor, and her clearance was terminated. She submitted the current SCA in 
January 2010, along with her employment application. She was hired by her current 
employer, a Government contractor, in November 2010, and she was granted an interim 
secret clearance which she still holds. There is no evidence to show she has 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
At her hearing, Applicant submitted numerous character statements from 
supervisors, clients, coworkers, and friends. Applicant has been providing consulting 
services to a sensitive Government agency. She is considered to be an extremely hard 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
working employee. She has demonstrated a pattern of integrity, loyalty, trustworthiness, 
and reliability. She is described as a dedicated professional and a tremendous asset to 
her employer. Her attention to detail and solid analytical abilities make her extremely 
valuable in a project management environment. She is also a very dedicated mother 
and has a good relationship with her children. 
 
In her January 2010 SCA, Applicant disclosed that she is an alcoholic, that she 
attended several alcohol treatment programs since 2007, and that she had emotional 
and psychological problems as a result of a violently abusive marriage.  
 
Applicant was raised by her mother, who continues to be an opiate drug addict. 
Her father was an alcoholic (currently two years sober), and she never saw too much of 
him around the household. His older sister served time in jail for possession of illegal 
substances. Applicant started consuming alcoholic beverages at age 12. She did not 
finish high school, left home, and used illegal drugs (cocaine, crack, and crank) between 
age 15 and 19. At age 18-19, she illegally used cocaine, crack, and crank almost every 
day. She stopped using drugs at age 20, because of a drug-related incident that almost 
killed her.  
 
Applicant attended college between 1996 and 2000, where she did well. While in 
college, she did not use drugs or abuse alcohol. Applicant met her ex-husband while in 
college, and they were married in 2000. During the course of their relationship and 
marriage, she was seriously abused physically and mentally. In October 2006, Applicant 
started abusing alcohol to cope with her marital abuse and depression. She attended a 
30-day inpatient alcohol treatment in April 2007. After her relapse, she attended a 
second chemical treatment program from August 2007 until September 2007. She was 
not able to remain clean and sober, and she was admitted into the residential level care 
program. In September 2007, she reentered the day care program, but she left the 
treatment program against medical advice on September 22, 2007. She was diagnosed 
with alcoholism (middle to late stage) and depression. 
 
From October 18, 2007 until November 21, 2007, Applicant attended another 
chemical treatment program. She was diagnosed with alcohol dependence; major 
depressive disorder, recurrent and severe; dysthymic disorder; generalized anxiety 
disorder; and an eating disorder. She attended a 40-day inpatient and outpatient alcohol 
treatment program, which included participation in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and 
women’s group counseling. Her relapse potential was listed as high.  
 
Applicant stated that from December 2007 until May 2009, she did not consume 
alcohol beyond an occasional relapse. She did not recall the dates or the number of 
relapses, but during the relapses she would consume between half to a full bottle of 
hard liquor. In May 2009, she relapsed and drove while under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI). She was convicted of that offense in August 2009.  
 
Applicant claimed she did not consume alcohol between May 2009 and April 
2011. In 2010, Applicant started seeing a licensed clinical social worker, but stopped 
 
4 
 
 
her treatment because of the lengthy commute required to attend the counseling. She 
was diagnosed with alcohol abuse/addiction. She continued attending AA meetings. In 
April 2011, Applicant’s ex-husband filed for sole custody of the children. Applicant was 
so upset that, notwithstanding the children were with her, she consumed half a bottle of 
hard liquor and passed out. Her children called the police and she was found 
unconscious on her bed. She was hospitalized for approximately two days. 
 
Applicant averred she has been attending AA meetings since December 2007. 
After her April 2011 alcohol-related incident, Applicant started attending AA meetings 
every day. In May 2011, Applicant again was upset and depressed, and consumed 
alcohol until intoxication. One of her neighbors called the police. She was hospitalized 
for one day and released. Applicant continued drinking until July 2011, when she started 
a new treatment for alcoholism and emotional concerns with a licensed clinical 
psychologist. According to her psychologist, as of November 2011, Applicant exhibited 
sobriety and improved functioning. She recommended continued weekly sessions. (AE 
2) Applicant relapsed in November 2011.  
 
In April 2012, Applicant was served with a family court order restricting her ability 
to visit with her children. The court order requires Applicant to remain sober for 12 
months, submit to random urinalysis tests every month, and to submit to breathalyzer 
tests before she is allowed to see her kids for a period of three hours twice a week. If 
she does not comply with the terms of the court order, she only can have supervised 
visits with her children. After one year of compliance with the court order, Applicant will 
be allowed more visits with her children.  
 
In April 2012, Applicant started psychiatric treatment for chronic depression. She 
was prescribed an anti-depressant, and she believes it is making a big difference in the 
way she feels. She believes that she finally has found something to help her stop 
consuming alcohol. Notwithstanding, she relapsed in April 2012, because of the stress 
caused by the family court proceedings, her work, her depression, and her involvement 
in a car accident that totaled her car. After the accident, Applicant drank a liter of hard 
alcohol a day for two days. 
 
Applicant is extremely remorseful about her alcohol-related behavior. She was 
candid and forthcoming at her hearing. She is aware that she is suffering from a serious 
disease, and she seems to be doing all that she can to remain sober and control her 
alcohol dependence. Her strong desire to remain sober is motivated by her desire to 
visit with her children. Applicant believes she now has in place all the mechanisms she 
needs to help her to remain sober. 
 
Applicant understands the behavior she is required to maintain to visit with her 
children. She also is aware that she has to establish her sobriety to be eligible for a 
security clearance. She noted that she has a long history of good performance. She 
considers herself to be of good character, trustworthy, and a dedicated professional. 
 
 
5 
 
 
On July 5 and 18, 2011, Applicant provided detailed sworn statements about her 
past behavior. In the July 5, 2011 statement, she stated: “I have never illegally used any 
controlled substances.” Applicant’s statement is contrary to the drug history she 
provided during medical assessments and interviews for prior alcohol treatment. It is 
also contrary to her testimony where she stated that she did not finish high school, left 
home, and illegally used cocaine, crack, and crank almost every day between age 15 
and 19. She stopped using illegal drugs at age 20, because she developed suicidal 
ideations and almost killed herself. 
 
Additionally, in the July 5, 2011 sworn statement, Applicant stated that she had 
not “seen any doctors or therapists for treatment or counseling for alcoholism since 
December 2007.” Applicant’s statement is contrary to her medical records and her 
hearing testimony, which indicates that in 2010, she sought counseling with a licensed 
social worker.   
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
 
6 
 
 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Under Guideline G the Government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
 The Government established its case under Guideline G by showing that 
Applicant has consumed alcohol, frequently to excess, from age 12 to present. Her 
alcohol abuse increased substantially from late 2006 to present. She was convicted of 
DUI in 2009, and she was involved in two serious alcohol-related incidents in April and 
May 2011, that required her hospitalization. Between 2007 and 2012, Applicant 
participated in five chemical dependence treatment programs. She was diagnosed with 
alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence in 2007, 2009, and 2010. She relapsed after 
every treatment program. Her most recent relapse was in April 2012.  
 
 The following alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 apply:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 There are four alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s questionable alcohol-related 
behavior is recent and happened frequently. I considered Applicant’s upbringing, her 
abusive marital relationship, her acrimonious divorce, and that she suffers from clinical 
depression. Some of those factors could be considered as unusual circumstances that 
contributed to her alcohol abuse and dependency. However, she has not overcome her 
depression, she continues to relapse frequently, and her alcohol consumption could 
also be triggered by routine stressful situations.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged her alcoholism, and she has been making a strong effort 
to remain sober. She participated in five chemical dependence treatment programs, and 
she relapsed after every treatment program. She was diagnosed with alcohol abuse and 
alcohol dependence in 2007, 2009, and 2010. Her most recent relapse was in April 
2012. Her evidence is insufficient to establish a pattern of abstinence. Additionally, she 
presented no clear unequivocal documentary evidence of a recent favorable prognosis 
from a duly qualified medical professional.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  In her July 5, 2011 sworn statement, Applicant made false statements when she 
stated: (1) “I have never illegally used any controlled substances,” and (2) “I have not 
seen any doctors or therapists for treatment or counseling for alcoholism since 
December 2007.” Applicant’s statements are contrary to her medical and alcohol 
treatment records and contrary to her testimony. She previously stated that she did not 
finish high school, left home, and illegally used cocaine, crack, and crank almost every 
day between age 15 and 19. She also used marijuana infrequently. Her medical records 
and her hearing testimony indicate that in 2010, she sought counseling with a licensed 
social worker.  
 
  Applicant’s false statements trigger the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant claimed she discussed her past use of illegal drugs with the 
Government investigator and that she has been candid and forthcoming during the 
security clearance process. Her testimony is not credible. 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions apply. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply because she did not correct her falsification 
before she was confronted with the facts. AG ¶¶ 17(b), (f), and (g) are not raised by the 
 
9 
 
 
facts of this case and are not applicable. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because making a 
false statement is a felony in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e) are partially applicable, but do not fully mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant has acknowledged her questionable behavior and she has taken 
significant steps to alleviate the stressors and circumstances that caused her 
untrustworthy and unreliable behavior (AG ¶ 17(d)). She also has taken some steps to 
reduce or eliminate her vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress (AG ¶ 
17(e)). Notwithstanding, she has not overcome her depression, she continues to 
relapse frequently, and her alcohol consumption could also be triggered by routine 
stressful situations. 
 
Applicant’s continued alcoholism and her false statements show lack of 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, and an unwillingness or inability to comply with 
rules and regulations. Her questionable behavior raises questions about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant is a dedicated mother with a strong relationship with her 
children. She is considered to be an outstanding employee and made significant 
contributions to her employer. She is dedicated, diligent, and displays excellent 
professional knowledge and abilities. She is working very hard to overcome her 
alcoholism and to control her depression. 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant is an alcoholic. She abused alcohol to cope with her 
marital abuse and severe clinical depression. She has been repeatedly diagnosed with 
alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence. Since 2007, she has participated in five 
chemical dependence treatment programs and she relapsed after each treatment. Her 
most recent relapse occurred in April 2012. Applicant is receiving psychiatric treatment 
and medication for her depression and seems to be doing better. Considering the 
record evidence as a whole, I find it is too soon for Applicant to establish that she can 
control her alcoholism and depression. She failed to mitigate the Guidelines G and E 
security concerns. 
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
