1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 10-04427
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate
the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 29, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
Applicant answered the SOR on February 15, 2012, admitting all of the
allegations and requesting a hearing. A notice of hearing was issued on April 20, 2012,
scheduling the case for May 8, 2012. I held the hearing as scheduled, considering
2
Applicant’s testimony, and receiving eight Government exhibits, marked as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, and eight Applicant exhibits (AE) marked as AE A through H.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 16, 2012.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old single man. He is a high school graduate and has
earned some college credits. Since 2009, he has worked for a defense contractor in
shipping and receiving. (Tr. 19)
While in his late teens and early twenties, Applicant smoked marijuana
approximately once a week, in social situations with friends. Also, he has used
hallucinogenic mushrooms twice and experimented with cocaine once. His use of these
other illegal drugs occurred in 2002. (GE 2 at 3-4)
In November 14, 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of
marijuana. He pled guilty and was fined $2,000 and placed on probation for one year.
As part of the probation, Applicant was required to undergo random urinalyses
approximately twice per month. He successfully completed probation. (Tr. 25)
Approximately three months after completing probation, Applicant was again
arrested and charged with possession of marijuana. He was again fined and placed on
probation for a year. After failing two random urinalyses, testing positive for marijuana,
Applicant was referred to a drug treatment center. (Tr. 20) He attended drug treatment
from March 2006 through May 2006. (GE 2 at 17) The treatment consisted of biweekly
counseling. 
Applicant successfully completed the counseling and has neither used  marijuana
nor any other illegal drugs since March 2006. Applicant’s marijuana use caused tension
with his family and friends who disapproved of it. (GE 2 at 17) Currently, Applicant lives
with his girlfriend and her daughter. He no longer associates with people who abuse
marijuana, and he has no intention of resuming his marijuana use. (GE 2 at 7) 
On February 26, 2010, an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) interviewed Applicant. When asked about illegal drug use, Applicant admitted his
previous marijuana use, but intentionally failed to disclose his use of cocaine and
hallucinogenic mushrooms.  In response to an interrogatory regarding his falsification,
Applicant responded, as follows:
I do want to say again that I sincerely regret if I have misled or been
untruthful in any way throughout this process. I have made mistakes that I
am not proud of when I was younger and I have learned from those
mistakes and took the lessons I learned to heart so I never have them
happen again. (GE 2 at 23)
3
Applicant comprehensively addressed his past marijuana usage on his security
clearance application disclosing the frequency, the related arrests, and the name and
address of the center where he received counseling. 
As of February 2011, Applicant owed creditors approximately $29,000 in
delinquent debt. (GE 6) Approximately one-third of this debt constitutes medical bills
(subparagraphs 2.a-2.r). (Tr. 23) Until 2009, Applicant did not have any health
insurance, and could not afford to pay for his medical expenses out-of-pocket.
In March 2011, Applicant retained a credit counseling company. The company
wrote letters to each of the credit reporting agencies disputing the debts as legally non-
collectible because of the expiration of the state’s statute of limitations. (Tr. 24, 35) In
this manner, the debts listed in subparagraphs 2.g through 2.r have been removed from
Applicant’s credit report. (Tr. 24) He acknowledged on cross-examination that getting
the delinquencies removed from his credit report is not synonymous with resolving
them. (Tr. 27) Applicant is considering a consolidation loan to satisfy the remaining SOR
debts, but he is reluctant to do so because of the job insecurity triggered by the security
clearance investigation. (Tr. 25)
Applicant has satisfied an unlisted delinquency owed to an apartment complex,
totaling $1,254. (AE E) Also, his student loans, which were in default but not listed in the
SOR, are now current. (Tr. 24)
Currently, Applicant earns approximately $27,000 per year. He has $250 of
monthly discretionary income. (Tr. 35)
 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel  . . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
4
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s drug involvement triggers the application AG ¶ 16(e),
“personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulations, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities
which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”
Applicant’s intentional omission during an interview with an OPM investigator of his
experimentation with cocaine and hallucinogenic mushrooms triggers the application of
AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other
official government representative.” 
Applicant was in his early twenties when his drug arrests occurred. Although he
did not successfully complete counseling after his first arrest, he successfully completed
counseling after his second arrest. He has not used marijuana or any other illegal drugs
in approximately six years, and has settled down, living with his girlfriend and her four-
year-old daughter. AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” applies.
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable to Applicant’s failure
to disclose his cocaine use and his use of hallucinogenic mushrooms to the OPM
investigator;
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment         
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense was so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Applicant did not disclose the cocaine and hallucinogenic drug usage until he received
interrogatories from DOHA that, among other things, requested an explanation for the
omission. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Although Applicant did not disclose his experimentation with hallucinogenic
mushrooms and cocaine during his interview with the OPM investigator, he
comprehensively addressed his marijuana use on his security clearance application,
listing the frequency, the related arrests, and the names and addresses of the places
where he received counseling. Under these circumstances, the omission of the
hallucinogenic mushroom and cocaine experimentation was minor. AG ¶ 17(c) applies.
5
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Applicant’s history of financial delinquencies triggers the application of AG ¶
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations.”
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Approximately a third of Applicant’s debts consist of medical expenses that he
could not pay because of lack of health insurance. Applicant is now current on his
previously delinquent student loans, and he has satisfied another unlisted debt. Also, he
retained a credit counselor that helped get old, uncollectible debts removed from his
credit reports. 
Although lack of income or lack of medical benefits can certainly lead to financial
difficulties, they are not indicative of the type of unexpected circumstances covered by
AG ¶ 20(b). Consequently, it is not applicable.
Applicant is now current on his student loan payments and has satisfied an
unlisted debt in its entirety. Also, he retained a credit counselor to help dispute debts
and get them removed from his credit report. Applicant recognizes, however, that
getting debts removed from his credit report because they are no longer collectible is
not the same as resolving them. His efforts, though insufficient, trigger the partial
application of AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d). In sum, it is too soon to conclude Applicant has
mitigated the financial considerations security concern given the minimal progress he
has made toward debt satisfaction. 
Whole-Person Concept
6
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred in his early twenties. He no longer
associates with his old, drug-using friends, and he has settled down, living with his
girlfriend and her daughter. The seriousness of this conduct is outweighed by
Applicant’s maturity and its remoteness in time. 
Applicant readily admitted lying to the OPM investigator about whether he used
any illegal drugs other than marijuana. He did not compound the severity of the
falsification by providing a false explanation. Moreover, on his security clearance
application, he comprehensively addressed his past marijuana usage, disclosing the
frequency, the related arrests, and the name and address of the center where he
received counseling. Given Applicant’s contrite, introspective testimony, I conclude the
possibility of recurrence is minimal. Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct
security concern.
Conversely, Applicant’s financial delinquencies remain largely unresolved.
Although getting old, non-collectible delinquencies removed from his credit reports may
improve his credit rating, it does not establish a track reform needed to mitigate the
security concern. Consequently, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial
considerations security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.r: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
