                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.  10-05831           
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On November 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1962), as
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 29, 2011, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2012, and was scheduled for
hearing on May 10, 2012. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5). Applicant relied on one  witness
(himself) and four exhibits (AEs A-D). The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 17,
2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of his marriage
dissolution settlement. There being no objection from Department Counsel, and for
good cause shown, I granted Applicant seven days to supplement the record. I also
granted Applicant’s request for a seven-day extension. Within the time permitted,
Applicant supplemented the record with his dissolution of marriage judgment, filed in
September 2008. I admitted his submission as AE E
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated five delinquent debts,
exceeding $35,000.  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations
covered by paragraphs 1.a through 1.e without explanation. 
                 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old help desk analyst for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in October 2004, and has one son (age six) from this marriage.
(GE 1; Tr. 46) He became a licensed registered nurse (RN) in 1997. (GE 1)
Following his graduation from high school in June 1996, Applicant worked for
about a year before enlisting in the Navy in August 1997. As a Navy enlistee, he served
ten years of active duty before receiving his honorable discharge in October 2007. (GEs
1 and 2) Applicant is currently enrolled in college and expects to earn a bachelor’s
degree in information technology management within the next 12 to 18 months. (Tr. 36,
39-40)
During his enlistment, he was deployed abroad on multiple occasions. He was
deployed in 1998 and in 1999. (Tr. 26) He was deployed again in 2001. (Tr. 26). During
his third deployment he met his wife. (Tr. 26) In 2006, Applicant deployed in support of
Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. (Tr. 26) When he returned to port, he learned his
wife was cheating on him and was addicted to methamphetamine. (Tr. 26-27, 44-45) 
3
Soon after his Navy discharge in 2007, Applicant and his wife separated. He
divorced his wife in September 2008. (AE E; Tr. 48)  Under the terms of his divorce, he
was  awarded full legal custody over his minor child. He and his son currently reside
with Applicant’s mother. (AE E; Tr. 48-49)
Applicant’s Finances
Before his marriage, Applicant enjoyed good credit and stable finances. (Tr. 43)
While deployed in 2006, his wife opened two credit card accounts with the creditor
identified in subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. (Tr. 27, 44-45) Both accounts were opened
under a power of attorney he granted to his wife. (Tr. 45) When he returned from his
2006 deployment, he learned of his wife’s opening the two accounts and charging
purchases exceeding $800. (Tr. 44-45) By the time he learned of the debts, the
balances on the two accounts had escalated to $9,100 and $2,300, respectively. (GEs
3-5; Tr. 46) 
Following his discharge from the Navy, Applicant encountered difficulty finding
work and incurred considerable credit card debt. (Tr. 31-32) He was unemployed for
almost nine months before he found employment, and paid little attention to his debts
during this period. (Tr. 33) After finding a temporary job in November 2008, he
accumulated a little money to address his debts. (Tr. 32-33) Following his lay-off from
this temporary job in February 2009, he found another temporary job, which lasted
about three-and one-half months (March 2009 through July 2009) before his employer
closed its offices. (Tr. 33-35) Once again, Applicant became unemployed and remained
out of work this time for more than six months. (Tr. 35) He did not become gainfully
employed again until January 2010. (Tr. 36)
Under the terms of his divorce judgment, Applicant gained full custody of his son.
(AE E; Tr. 29-30) In their division of property, the court assigned the two credit card
debts (creditors 1.a and 1.b) to Applicant’s spouse. (AE E) To the extent Applicant paid
any of these assigned debts, he became entitled to full reimbursement from his spouse.
(AE E)  When his wife did not address either of the creditor 1.a and creditor 1.b debts
following their divorce, Applicant accepted responsibility for them. (Tr. 30-31) Besides
assigning the two credit card debts to his ex-spouse, the court imposed child support
payment responsibilities on her as well. Currently, his ex-wife contributes $221 in
monthly child support payments. (AE E; Tr. 48-49)
 More recently, Applicant paid his creditor 1.d debt with a lump sum $1,522
payment in full settlement of the debt (AE D) and his creditor 1.e debt with a full
payment of $105. (AE C)  Further, he settled his debts with creditors 1.a and 1.b with
individual payment plans. (AEs ) In May 2012, he entered into payment agreements
with the collection agent of the creditor covered by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. (AEs A
and B) Under the terms of his settlements, Applicant agreed to pay $50 a month each
month to each of the two listed accounts until they are fully paid. He will be making his
agreed monthly payments to the collection agent for these creditors and hopes to
4
increase his monthly payments in six months. (Tr. 30, 50-51)  He expects to pay off
these debts by late 2012 or early 2014. (Tr. 30-31, 41-42) 
The only debt that Applicant has not individually addressed is his debt with
creditor 1.c for $21,836. This debt represents the deficiency balance following the
repossession of his vehicle in 2008. (Tr. 37-38) The deficiency balance remains
unsatisfied. (AE D; Tr. 38) Applicant accepts responsibility for the deficiency and is
committed to repaying this debt. He hopes to be able to address this debt next year
when he expects his available income sources to improve. (Tr. 38, 42)
Applicant documents net monthly earnings of $4,682 and monthly expenses of
$3,445. (GE 2) He reports a net monthly remainder of $1,240. (GE 2) and is further
aided by the child support payments recently initiated by his ex-wife.
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by his command. (Tr. 57-58) During his Navy
enlistment, he earned numerous decorations commemorating his service. His medals
and ribbons include the National Defense Service Medal, the Global War on Terrorism
Service Medal, a Sea Service Deployment ribbon, a Navy “E” Ribbon, a Navy Good
Conduct Medal, and a Marine Corps Achievement Medal. (GE 2; Tr. 53-54)
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
5
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
6
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a well-regarded help desk analyst for a defense contractor whose
credit reports list five debts.  He accumulated marital debts during extended periods of
unemployment following his Navy discharge. He has since paid off two of the debts
(creditors 1.d and 1.e) and has repayment plans in place to pay off two other debts
(creditors 1.a and 1.b)  Only Applicant’s debt with creditor 1.c awaits resolution. 
       Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the AGs
when the individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of valid delinquent debts and his past inability to
resolve these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guidelines ¶ DC 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Applicant’s good-faith efforts to resolve his debts merit the application of two of the
mitigating conditions for financial considerations: ¶ MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;”
7
and MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under
the circumstances.” These mitigating conditions have considerable applicability to
Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debts, two of which were assigned to his ex-wife for
payment in his divorce judgment. 
To be sure, Applicant is still liable for his creditor 1.c deficiency debt for $21,836.
In similar  circumstances, the Appeal Board has said that an applicant need not have paid
or resolved every one of his proven debts or addressed all of his debts simultaneously.
What he needs is a credible plan to resolve his financial problems, accompanied by
implementing actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-06488 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) By the
proofs presented, Applicant has achieved most of his objectives. He has only one debt
left to address and is committed to paying this debt with resources as they become
available. His payment efforts reflect a proven plan of repayment. 
Consideration of Applicant’s background and circumstances surrounding his debt
disputes, his steady income and good credit for most of his personal and business
career, and the concerted efforts he has made to resolve his debts reflect positively on
Applicant and demonstrate his overall good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
Applicant’s proofs provide credible indicators of  his ability to be trusted in times of stress
and enable him  to meet his own evidentiary burden of mitigating the covered debts. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is substantial that Applicant has
mounted good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. Since joining his current employer, he has
paid two of the listed debts (i.e., creditors 1.d and 1.e) in full and established payment
plans with two of his remaining creditors (creditors 1.a and 1.b). He shows considerable
promise in completing them. 
Although Applicant has not yet mounted any payment initiatives on the only
remaining debt he has not addressed (i.e., the $21,836 deficiency balance owing creditor
1.c), he is fully committed to satisfying this debt as well when income resources become
more readily available. Applicant has a record of meritorious military service and has also
shown that he is a good father to his young son.
All of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s listed
delinquent debts and the good-faith efforts he has mounted to resolve them under difficult
circumstances enable him to successfully mitigate judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness concerns related to his debts. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect
to the allegations covered by the financial considerations guideline. 
        
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
8
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:            For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
