 
 
1 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-05909 
                       ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns raised under foreign influence and foreign 
preference, but has not mitigated the security concerns under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) setting forth security concerns under 
Guidelines B (Foreign Influence), C (Foreign Preference), F (Financial Considerations), 
and E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 Applicant submitted an 
                                                 
1 
Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
undated, notarized Answer to the SOR in which he denied the allegations under 
Guidelines C and E.2 He admitted the allegations under Guideline B, except for 1.a and 
1.c, and admitted the allegations under Guideline F, except for 3.f. Applicant also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 16, 2011, and the 
case was assigned to me on January 12, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
February 8, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 20, 2012. 
Department Counsel offered seven exhibits, which I admitted as Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified, offered the testimony of one witness, and 
submitted 31 exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through EE. I held 
the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. He submitted 
seven additional documents. Department Counsel had no objection. I admitted the 
documents as AE FF through LL. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 29, 
2012. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel amended the SOR to correct a typographical error under 
Guideline B. The original allegation at subparagraph 2.f referenced “subparagraph 3.a. 
below.” That wording is deleted, and the following is inserted in its place: 
“subparagraphs 2.a., 2.b., and 2.c., above.” 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to Afghanistan, set forth in six 
documents submitted by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are 
limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 56 years old, was born in Afghanistan. He attended high school there 
and worked as an auto repairman. He came to the United States in 1981, when he was 
about 26 years old. He has not had an Afghan passport since it expired in 1982. He 
attended a U.S. college for several months in 1983. He married a U.S. citizen in 1982 
and they divorced in 1984. He became a U.S. naturalized citizen in 1989. Applicant 
does not own property in the United States and lived with his brother. He operated his 
                                                 
2
 Applicant’s program manager assisted Applicant with his SOR Answer, because English is not 
Applicant's first language. The manager misunderstood the allegations, and misrepresented their 
meaning to Applicant. Based on this misinterpretation, Applicant answered “Admit” to allegations 2.c and 
2.f under Guideline E. His program manager informed Applicant's attorney on February 21, 2012, that 
these responses were in error, and Applicant’s intent was to answer “Deny.” I conclude that Applicant 
denies these two allegations. (AE A, N) 
 
 
 
3 
own pizza restaurant from 1992 to 2004. He was unemployed after selling his business 
in 2004. Between 2004 and 2006, he supported himself on the profits from the sale of 
the restaurant. He worked intermittently between 2006 and 2008, and began working for 
his current employer in August 2008. (GE 1, 3, 4; AE L; Tr. 52-52, 65-67, 94, 102) 
 
In 2005, Applicant returned to Afghanistan and met a woman. They married in 
December 2005, and lived with her family. Applicant returned to the United States in 
March 2006 to “apply for my wife and seeking to go back to work.” He obtained a 
position with a defense contractor (W) in May 2006, was granted a secret security 
clearance, and returned to Afghanistan in June 2006. Through W, he worked as a 
linguist and cultural advisor to a U.S. coalition partner (X) from June to December 2006. 
(GE 1, 5; AE L; Tr. 52-52, 65-73) 
 
In January 2007, Applicant returned to the United States. He was unemployed 
from January to April 2007, and lived with his brother. In April 2007, he returned to 
Afghanistan, and was unemployed until October 2007. He lived intermittently with his 
wife’s family or his sister’s family. He was then self-employed as a linguist and guide for 
U.S. forces from November 2007 to February 2008. He was unemployed until May 
2008, when he returned to the United States. In August 2008, he started working for his 
current employer and returned to Afghanistan. Applicant’s position involves “training 
counter-narcotics police, supplying linguists to intelligence agencies, and providing 
support to NATO and U.S. public affairs efforts in Afghanistan.” He does not own 
property in Afghanistan, but has lived there since 2008, while working with U.S. forces. 
Applicant testified that he has no obligations to the Afghan government, and receives no 
government benefits. (GE 1, 3, 4; AE L; Tr. 52-52, 72-78, 81-83, 95) 
 
Applicant’s wife, an Afghan citizen, is a homemaker. She has never visited or 
lived in the United States. He filed a U.S. immigrant petition for her in 2006. Applicant 
applied for a visa for her to come to the United States, and she was interviewed for the 
visa in May 2010. As of January 2011, her visa was pending and she plans to 
eventually apply for U.S. citizenship. They have two children, who are one and two 
years old. They were born in Afghanistan and have U.S. citizenship through Applicant.3 
The children have U.S., but not Afghan, passports. In January 2011, Applicant stated 
that his wife and children will move to the United States after she receives the visa, and 
live with Applicant's brother. Applicant would then return to Afghanistan to work. (GE 1, 
2, 3, 4; AE C, D; Tr. 42-44, 68-69, 79-80, 86, 101-102) 
 
Applicant's brother has lived in the United States for about 14 years. He is a legal 
U.S. permanent resident, and a citizen of Afghanistan. He worked at Applicant’s pizza 
restaurant. Applicant does not know where his brother is currently employed. Applicant 
lives with his brother when he is in the United States. (GE 3; Tr. 85-86)  
                                                 
3
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated his child is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Afghanistan. At the hearing, he stated that his children are only citizens of the United States. (Answer; 
Tr. 44) 
 
 
 
4 
Applicant has additional family members who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan, including his sister, stepmother, three stepbrothers, mother- and father-in-
law, brothers-in-law, and one uncle.4 His sister’s husband is deceased, and her son, 
daughter-in-law, and grandchildren live with her. In his 2009 interrogatory response, 
Applicant said, “When I am in Kabul, I can count on living there. My wife stays there all 
the time. When I am in Afghanistan, this is my home.” He also stated he did not pay his 
sister rent, but provided her with some financial support. Currently, he stays primarily 
with his wife’s family, but sometimes with his sister, and sometimes on base. Applicant 
now sees his sister once every three or four months. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 81-85)  
 
Applicant lost touch with his stepmother and stepbrothers when he moved to the 
United States in 1981. When he went to Afghanistan in 2005, he re-established the 
relationship. Applicant testified that they work in a retail shop that sells farm supplies.5 
Since 2005, he sees them once every few years, and last saw them about three years 
ago.6 Applicant's wife, sister, and stepbrothers have no connections with the Afghan 
government. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 44-48, 83-90) 
 
Applicant‘s mother-in-law is a homemaker, and his father-in-law is a farmer and 
village elder. As an elder, his duty is to settle disagreements among the villagers. 
Applicant's brother-in-law (his sister-in-law’s husband) works for NATO in Afghanistan. 
Applicant's other brother-in-law (his wife’s brother) is a farmer, and lives with Applicant's 
wife and their parents. Applicant's uncle is a farmer. In his 2010 affidavit, Applicant said 
he saw his uncle about monthly. At the hearing, he testified that he had not seen his 
uncle in about four years. (GE 2; Tr. 44-48, 83, 86-88, 91-92) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
From 1992 to 2004, Applicant and a partner owned a pizza restaurant in the 
United States. Applicant's business declined and in 2002, he filed for bankruptcy 
protection under Chapter 13. He successfully completed the plan, and it was discharged 
in 2005. On March 22, 2012, seven years after completing his bankruptcy, Applicant 
took an online course in financial management. The course satisfies a requirement of 
his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. After he sold his restaurant, he was unemployed from 2004 
to May 2006, when he obtained the job with W. After his termination in December 2006, 
he was unemployed until November 2007. He worked as an independent contractor for 
U.S. forces in Afghanistan until February 2008. He was unemployed from February until 
May, 2008, and then returned to the United States “to start the work and to work on my 
                                                 
4
 The SOR alleges Applicant has three uncles, but Applicant testified that two died within the past few 
years. (GE 2; Tr. 47, 91) 
 
5
 The record is unclear about Applicant's stepbrothers’ occupations, because Applicant said in his 2009 
subject interview that his stepbrothers are farmers. (GE 3) 
 
6
 It appears Applicant may have been confused during direct examination by the term “stepbrothers.” 
When asked about his brother who lives in the United States, Applicant described his “brothers” who live 
in Afghanistan and work in a retail shop. (Tr. 45-46) 
 
 
5 
credits.” In August 2008, he obtained employment with a U.S. company and started his 
current job, which was located in Afghanistan. (GE 3, 6; AE J, L, Y, II; Tr. 52-53, 75-76, 
93-95) 
 
Applicant's initial salary at his current employment was approximately $20,000 
annually, and he now earns $79,311. His monthly gross income is $6,154. His 
expenses and bills total $5,000, leaving a monthly net remainder of approximately 
$1,154. Applicant's March 2012 credit report shows no real estate, installment, or other 
loans, no open accounts, and one closed credit card account with a zero balance. (AE 
J, GG, II, JJ, KK, LL; Tr. 93-94, 99-100) 
 
 The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed liens totaling $12,981 against Applicant 
for unpaid taxes for 2002 ($3,915); 2003 ($1,123); and 2006 ($7,943). The liens for 
2002 and 2003 relate to business taxes for Applicant's pizza restaurant; the lien for tax 
year 2006 relates to Applicant's personal income taxes. He stated he did not have the 
money to pay the tax he owed. He contacted the IRS starting in 2009, and visited his 
local IRS office when he was in the United States. He also attempted to reach the 
agency while he was in Afghanistan. The IRS granted Applicant time to pay the liens. In 
his January 2011 interrogatory response, he stated, “the next time I return to the United 
States, I will make contact with the IRS and make arrangements to settle these debts.” 
He paid $21,831 on December 14, 2011, using funds he earned from his current 
employment to satisfy the liens. He testified that this amount covered taxes he owed for 
2002, 2003, and 2006, and he does not owe any other taxes.7 He has filed his tax 
returns every year. He waited until December 2011 to pay the debts because he did not 
know how to pay online. Following a withdrawal from his savings to pay his tax debt, 
Applicant had a total of approximately $129,000 in his U.S. checking and savings 
accounts. (GE 3, 4, 6; AE V, GG, KK; Tr. 53-55, 92-97) 
 
 Based on Applicant's admission in his security clearance application, the 
September 2011 SOR alleges Applicant was more than six months past due on a 
telephone company account in the amount of $2,733. However, he disputes the 
amount, stating that the company overcharged him for phone calls to his wife in 
Afghanistan, which should have cost $455. He listed the debt in his 2009 security 
clearance application, noting that he disputed the amount with the creditor. He testified 
that the company made a mistake, and “I was back and forth with them.” In his 2011 
interrogatory response, he stated that the company offered a settlement of $1,500, but 
Applicant  rejected it. As of January 2011, the debt was still in dispute. His March 2012 
credit report does not list the debt. (GE 1, 3, 4, 7; AE J; Tr. 55-56) 
 
                                                 
7
 The evidence is unclear on whether Applicant has paid all of the tax he owed. He testified that the 
$21,828 he paid covered his debt for all his outstanding taxes, but his payment document shows that the 
payment applied to tax year 2006. Applicant's March 2012 credit report indicates that he had tax liens for 
2002 ($148); 2003 ($142); 2004 ($129); and 2007 ($1,133). The credit report does not indicate if they 
were federal or state tax liens. Each of these liens is listed as released. (AE J, V; Tr. 92) 
 
 
6 
 Applicant has no knowledge of a judgment that was filed against him by a 
collection agency in 1996 for a delinquent debt of $880. He tried to contact the 
company, without success. He did not dispute the debt with the court or the credit 
reporting agencies. (GE 4, 7; AE J; Tr. 56, 94, 100-101) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In May 2006, Applicant began his position with a defense contractor, W, as a 
linguist and cultural advisor in Afghanistan. Through W, he started working for coalition 
partner X in Afghanistan in June 2006. He sustained injuries to his knee and groin from 
a fall while working in-country for X. The doctor’s notes indicate his injuries resulted 
from fatigue after “sustained activity in a harsh environment.” The injuries limited his 
mobility and ability to do manual work. In September 2006, he had surgery for the groin 
injury. Four weeks of light duty was prescribed, but Applicant states that he returned to 
duty before his convalescence was complete. (GE 5 at 13-14; AE E) 
 
In a December 9, 2006 memorandum, the interpreter manager at X noted 
Applicant's negative work performance: Applicant complained about the work 
assignments, conditions, and long hours; he was repeatedly counseled about the 
appropriate way to resolve grievances, which he did not follow; and he was removed 
from three different areas of work for personnel issues. He was described as “unsuitable 
for work in a military environment.” The manager was concerned that Applicant was 
exposed to sensitive and classified aspects of coalition operations and that some of 
Applicant’s complaints “are made without regard to operational security and relate to 
classified matters” that could affect safety of the forces. (GE 5 at 6) 
 
In the same memorandum, the interpreter manager informed W that Applicant 
was being terminated, and related the following. On December 4, 2006, Applicant acted 
in a belligerent manner toward a female NCO. He was told that he was “no longer 
required for duty and should stand down” and that he would be flown to Kabul at the first 
opportunity. On December 5, the interpreter manager told Applicant that he would be 
leaving on a flight to Kabul three days later, and he would be paid until the end of his 
contract on December 16, 2006. Applicant was also told to return on December 6 to be 
debriefed before departure, to discuss security obligations and confidentiality, and to 
return X’s equipment. The interpreter manager states that Applicant left on December 6 
without notice, and without signing a non-disclosure agreement or being debriefed. (GE 
5 at 4-6) 
 
In his affidavit of October 2009, Applicant stated he thought his manager at X 
(interpreter manager) did not like him. In several documents written in December 2006 
and January 2007, Applicant listed other complaints about conditions at X, including the 
following: The employee who was in control of Applicant's shifts and assignments did 
not like Applicant and gave Applicant night shifts two weeks straight, used obscene 
language, and required Applicant to work while he was sick with a fever; Applicant was 
accused of giving his cellphone to local translator, but when the perpetrator of this 
 
 
7 
misappropriation was discovered, he (the translator) was not held accountable, and 
Applicant received no apology; the authorities did not listen to Applicant's complaints; 
soldiers kept “blue photos” in their rooms, and bought “blue DVDs” from a base store;8 
and W’s regional manager told “sex stories” in front of females. In regard to the 
translator who gave his cellphone to a local civilian, Applicant asked in his December 
20, 2006 statement, “[W]hy he [translator] is still on job and where I am not . . . guilty 
the[y] dismissed me.”9 (GE 3, 5 at 10, 19-20)  
 
On December 16, 2006, W’s regional manager met with Applicant about X’s 
allegations. He told Applicant his contract with W had ended, and W would fly him to his 
home in Kabul. He also told Applicant to surrender his CAC card, because he was no 
longer a W employee, and to wait off-base for instructions about the flight. Applicant's 
statement of December 20, 2006 supports W’s description of events, noting that on 
December 16, the W site manager asked him to surrender his card and leave the base. 
In the same statement, Applicant said that he called another W manager: “[T]hen again 
I called Mr. [name] he said that you are dismissed from your job . . .” In describing this 
scene in a letter dated January 24, 2007, Applicant stated, “[name] told me that I have 
been fired from the job.” Also, in a letter dated January 24, 2007,10 describing the 
sequence of events in December 2006, he states, “[Y]ou have mentioned that due to 
the ‘insecurity and rudeness’ I was fired.” (GE 5 at 1-2, 10-11, 18) 
 
On December 17, 2006, Applicant came to the base gate “because I want to 
complaint (sic) against [W] to high Authorities.” When he was not admitted, he called 
several people and, according to the regional manager, yelled at managers over the 
phone. Applicant and the regional manager exchanged insults over the phone. The 
manager told Applicant he was not to return because he was not on contract, and he 
was being investigated regarding an alleged security violation. Applicant contacted 
several people trying to be admitted to the base. One of them “…told me that I have 
been fired from the job.”11 Subsequently, the W regional manager instructed the entry 
control and badging personnel to prohibit Applicant from entering the base. (GE 5 at 1-
2; GE 5 at 21) 
 
                                                 
8
 While Applicant  does not define the word “blue,” I take it in this context to indicate indecent or 
pornographic material. 
 
9
 I interpret Applicant's comment to indicate that he questions why the perpetrator was not dismissed 
from his job, but he (Applicant) was dismissed. (GE 5 at 19) 
 
10
 The recipient of the letter is identified only by first name. That first name appears in an email dated 
December 17, 2006 from the W regional manager to other W managers. However, I cannot determine 
from the record whether the recipient is a W manager. (GE 5) 
 
11
 Other than a first name, Applicant does not identify the person who told him he was fired at this point. 
The record does not indicate whether he was military member, a civilian contractor, or a W employee. 
(GE 5 at 11) 
 
 
8 
On December 27, 2006, Applicant contacted W’s regional manager. The 
manager asked if Applicant wanted W to arrange his flight back to the United States. 
The manager did not consider Applicant’s response appropriate, and they became 
angry and again exchanged insults. Applicant said he would complain. The manager 
stated that Applicant said he would “go live with the Taliban and Al Qaeda and talk to 
them.” (GE 5 at 7-8) 
 
Applicant denies the accusation concerning the Taliban and al-Qaeda. In his 
October 2009 security interview, he called it a “garbage statement” and “shameful.” He 
denies contact with either group. He noted that he listened to communications from the 
Taliban and then warned U.S. soldiers about them. When asked at the hearing if he 
ever spoke with the Taliban or al-Qaeda, Applicant testified, “It is a very shame. Never I 
did this, no.” He attributes this accusation to racism of the W site manager, because the 
site manager and Applicant are from different ethnic groups. (GE 3 at 20, GE 5 at 11; 
Tr. 51) 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application in July 2009. He indicated 
that he left W because his “contract expired.” He answered “No” when asked if, within 
the previous seven years, he had been fired, quit, left under unfavorable circumstances, 
or was laid off. In an affidavit dated October 2009, Applicant stated that he had not been 
counseled by X, released from duty by X, or terminated by W. Applicant stated during 
his security interview in October 2009 that he had never been involuntarily terminated 
from employment. (GE 1, 2, 3; Tr. 48-52) 
 
In a statement dated February 10, 2012, Applicant characterizes his departure 
from X and W as follows: 
 
Mr. [interpreter manager] was not a good boss. I decided to terminate my 
employment with [W] and find other work, taking my last two weeks of 
leave at the end of my contract, which expired effective December 16, 
2006. On December 4, Mr. [interpreter manager] directed me to begin my 
exit from Afghanistan. At no time did he inform me I was terminated, and 
the timetable was consistent with my belief that I was departing on 
schedule, with my last vacation days carrying me to the end . . . . 
 
I categorically deny that I was informed I was fired from any job. (AE L) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant denied he engaged in misconduct during his 
employment with X, that he was counseled by X, or that he was moved among three 
work areas because of personnel issues. He does not know how these accusations 
arose. He testified that he was not terminated by either X or W. He left only because his 
contract with W had ended. Applicant also denied falsifying his security clearance 
application and his affidavit. (Tr. 48-50) 
 
 
 
9 
A program manager in Applicant's company testified that Applicant has been 
invaluable in assisting with safety issues, logistics, and local vetting of linguist 
candidates in Afghanistan. The witness was in Afghanistan in 2006, when Applicant 
worked for W. The witness is also familiar with W, which is a competitor of Applicant's 
current employer. Concerning W’s business practices, he testified that, “[W]hen they 
don't have an agreement with the linguist, they usually tend to file reports and falsify 
reports and hurting the linguist.” He had no first-hand knowledge of such acts. He was 
unaware Applicant was terminated by W, and understood that Applicant's contract with 
W had ended. He stated he would have been informed when Applicant was hired if 
Applicant had personnel issues when he worked for W in 2006. (AE AA, HH; Tr. 25-40) 
 
The program manager, and others who wrote references for Applicant, stated 
that Applicant saved the lives of American contractors. The witness was present during 
an event in 2006, when a van carrying five American contractors was involved in a 
traffic accident in Kabul, where several Afghan civilians died. An angry mob threw rocks 
and prepared to burn the vehicle, while local police stood by. Applicant intervened, and 
“placed himself between the angry mob and the [company] personnel and escorted 
them at a full run while an angry mob chased them.” The contractors were taken to the 
embassy, and the mob burned the car. Applicant provided a copy of a local newspaper 
that reported the incident. The U.S. company awarded Applicant a certificate and coins 
for his “exceptional bravery” in saving the employees’ lives. (AE AA, F, I, P, Q, U, CC) 
 
Applicant worked in Afghanistan with either the U.S. forces or a coalition partner 
for periods between 2006 and 2008. He has worked there continuously since August 
2008 for his current employer. He submitted numerous certificates of appreciation, and 
photographs showing him with combat troops in Afghanistan. He offered 19 letters that 
attest to his character and contributions to the war effort. Military members who worked 
with him in 2008 noted that he has proved himself in a “situation of extreme stress and 
potential loss of life,” and was willing to work in dangerous locations. A Department of 
State employee, who formerly worked for Applicant's employer and managed Applicant, 
states that Applicant “always uses discretion in meeting mission objectives” and has the 
utmost commitment to the United States. (AE B, F, H, I, EE) 
 
The references of two former federal government agents described Applicant as 
brave and intelligent. One noted that Applicant “[H]as worked to support U.S. 
objectives…despite the great danger to himself and family members.” Other defense 
contractors working in Afghanistan commented on Applicant's “sterling performance 
record,” professionalism, and reliability. A high-level civilian who has worked in 
Afghanistan and Iraq for the past five years stated that their mission would not have 
succeeded without Applicant's judgment, integrity, and diplomacy. (AE G, O, R, W, Z, 
BB, DD) 
 
 References from Applicant's current employer, including the chief executive 
officer, extoll Applicant's trustworthiness and dedication, and describe him as a “true 
patriot.” An in-country program manager stated that Applicant “has placed himself 
 
 
10 
between belligerent crowds and local police to extricate U.S. employees from explosive 
situations on at least three occasions. In addition, he controls government equipment 
worth tens of thousands of dollars, and during the 2011 inventory, the manager found 
no deficiencies. He noted that he feels “completely secure traveling outside the 
protection of military forces when he’s escorting me . . . . I implicitly trust [Applicant] and 
feel that he would place himself between me and any potential danger given that he 
could do so.” Another program manager at Applicant's company notes that Applicant 
puts himself in dangerous positions while protecting Americans, which reflects on his 
loyalty to the United States. He was present when Applicant escorted several American 
contractors away from an angry mob of local civilians who were threatening their lives. 
The manager formerly conducted background investigations, is aware of security 
requirements, and has “no reservations in recommending [Applicant]” for a security 
clearance. (AE M, P, Q, S, T, X) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan) is a country in Southwestern 
Asia approximately the size of Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on 
the east and the south. Iran borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a 
rugged and mountainous country which has been fought over by powerful nations for 
centuries. In 2009, the population was about 28 million people with about 3 million 
Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected president. It 
has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Soviet Union in 1979. 
After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union withdrew from the country, 
fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and religious militias. By the end of 
1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90 percent of the country, imposing 
aggressive and repressive policies.  
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaida and the Taliban, continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target 
United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, 
car-jackings, assaults, or hostage taking. The country’s human rights record is poor 
and violence is rampant. The risk of terrorist activities remains extremely high. 
According to the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and 
kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. 
No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.  
 
According to the Department of State, the United States has made a long-term 
commitment to help Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The United States and 
others in the international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
 
 
11 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and assistance, 
capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, and infrastructure 
projects. During a 2009 speech at West Point, President Obama laid down the core 
U.S. goals in Afghanistan: to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe 
havens in Pakistan, and to prevent their return to Afghanistan. He stressed that the 
United States is willing to support the Afghan president’s focus on reintegration, 
economic development, improving relations with Afghan regional partners, and steadily 
increasing the security responsibilities of the Afghan security forces. The United States 
commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers to citizens and 
residents of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan.  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be an impartial and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.12 Decisions 
also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest13 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.14 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to safeguard 
classified information. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.15 
                                                 
11 
Directive § 6.3. 
12
See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
13 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
14 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
12 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion 
by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 I have considered all the conditions under AG ¶ 7 that may be disqualifying, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States in not in question. He has been a U.S. 
citizen for 23 years. He has shown his loyalty through actions that placed his own life at 
risk. However, Applicant’s foreign ties raise security concerns because of his ongoing 
family relationships. He lives in Afghanistan, where he has numerous family members, 
including his wife and two children. His foreign ties place him in a position where he 
might have to choose between his family’s interests and the interests of the United 
States. 
 
 Family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country are only disqualifying 
under Guideline B, if they create a conflict of interest or a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation. Applicant lives with his wife and in-laws, who are citizens of Afghanistan. 
 
 
13 
He sometimes lives with his sister and her family, who are also citizens of Afghanistan. 
The country in question must be considered.16 Terrorists including al-Qaida and the 
Taliban, operate within Afghanistan. They target United States and Afghan interests by 
suicide operations, bombings, or hostage taking. The risk of terrorist activities is 
extremely high. Insurgents plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other 
Western nationals. Applicant has lived in Afghanistan intermittently between 2005 and 
2008, and continuously since 2008. His ties and contacts with his foreign family in 
Afghanistan represent a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, and a potential conflict 
of interest between his ties to his family and the requirement to protect classified 
information. AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) apply.  
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant has a close relationship and frequent contact with his immediate 
family, who are Afghan citizens. Given his location in a combat zone, and his 
employment by a U.S. contractor, he could be placed in a position of exploitation, or 
one where he could be forced to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. AG ¶ 8(a) 
and (c) cannot be applied. 
 
Although Applicant has ties to Afghanistan through his family, he also has ties to 
the United States. He lived here from 1981 to about 2005. His brother is a legal 
permanent resident of the United States, and Applicant lived with him during the more 
than two decades he lived in the United States. His future plans involve having his 
family move to the United States, and applying for his wife’s U.S. citizenship. His two 
children are U.S. citizens and have U.S. passports. Although he does not own real 
property in either the United States or Afghanistan, his most significant financial 
                                                 
15 
See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (Ap. Bd., Sep 26, 2006)  
 
 
14 
investment was in a restaurant he operated in the United States for 12 years. He has 
substantial savings, close to $130,000, in a U.S. bank. Other than intermittent periods 
of unemployment, Applicant has worked for U.S. forces and/or coalition partners in 
Afghanistan since 2006.  
 
 The concern under Guideline B is that applicants with foreign ties could have 
divided loyalties, may be induced to help a foreign entity, or may succumb to coercion 
by a foreign interest, to the detriment of U.S. interests. The Appeal Board has held in 
several cases that an applicant's demonstrated willingness to place himself or herself 
in harm’s way for the sake of United States interests is a significant factor when 
analyzing Guideline B issues. In ISCR Case No. 07-00034, it held that, although mere 
statements of intent carry little weight,  
 
[A]n applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the U.S. is very 
important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline 
B case. See, e.g., ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). In 
this case, Applicant has served the U.S. military as a translator in 
dangerous circumstances in Afghanistan and has risked his life to protect 
American personnel there.17  
 
In ISCR Case No. 06-25928, the Appeal Board held that an applicant's service to the 
United States at the risk of his own personal safety “. . . constitute[s] important 
evidence that applicant’s ties and sense of obligation to the U.S. could be sufficiently 
strong that he could “[b]e expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
. . .”18 
 
 Here, the record shows that Applicant has supported U.S. forces since 2007. In 
one instance, Applicant ran to the aid of five American contractors whose lives were in 
jeopardy from an angry Afghan mob. Without regard for his own safety, he pulled them 
from the van, and ensured that they were brought to safety at the U.S. embassy. 
Several of his character references and his witness attest to the incident, which was 
reported in a local newspaper. Applicant has acted to protect U.S. personnel in several 
such incidents, according to the Afghanistan in-country manager. A former federal 
agent noted that Applicant's position places his family in danger. His continued support 
of U.S. forces shows he is unlikely to succumb to pressure related to his family. Given 
the record evidence of Applicant's willingness to put U.S. interests ahead of his own 
safety, I conclude that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interests. AG  8(b) applies. 
                                                 
17
 ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
18
 ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008), with citations as follows: Directive ¶ E2.8(b). 
See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006.) (Applicant’s work as an interpreter in 
Afghanistan occurred “in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which [he] made a 
significant contribution to the national security.”) See also ISCR Case No. 04-12363 (App. Bd. Jul. 14, 
2006); ISCR Case No. 07-00034 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) 
 
 
 
15 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern under Guideline C, AG ¶ 9, is that  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline C that Applicant has shown a preference for 
Afghanistan over the United States because he has lived primarily in Afghanistan since 
2005, even when he was not employed. This conduct does not relate to the specific 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 10, but to the general Guideline C Concern.  
 
The evidence does not show that Applicant indicated a preference for 
Afghanistan over the United States. He chose to come to the United States more than 
30 years ago, in 1981. When his Afghan passport expired in 1982, he chose not to 
renew it. He chose to become a U.S. citizen in 1989. He lived and resided in the United 
States initially working as a mechanic. He then started his own business here, which 
he operated for 12 years. His lack of property in the United States does not indicate 
preference for either country, because he does not own property in either country. His 
choice of residence has depended on the location of his employment. 
 
After he sold his business in 2004, he was unemployed for an extensive period, 
living on savings and his profit from the sale. After he married in December 2005, he 
returned to the United States to seek work. He obtained employment with a U.S. 
contractor that involved working in Afghanistan, and he traveled back to Afghanistan in 
May 2006. After that job ended six months later, he returned to the United States to 
seek work. Between January and October 2007, he spent several months in each 
location, seeking employment. He obtained work for U.S. forces in Afghanistan from 
late 2007 to early 2008. After three months unemployment, he again returned to the 
United States to seek work. He found a job with his current U.S. employer in May 2008, 
and it involved his returning to Afghanistan. He has lived where he works since then. I 
conclude that Applicant's residence has been determined by his employment. He has 
lived in Afghanistan since 2008, because that is where he works to provide service to 
U.S. forces. Between 2005 and 2008, Applicant traveled back and forth between the 
United States and Afghanistan in search of work. For almost 25 years before that, he 
lived where he worked, in the United States. I find that Applicant has not indicated a 
preference for Afghanistan over the United States under Guideline C. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
 
 
16 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR lists $16,594 in delinquent debts, and Applicant admits all but a 
disputed debt of $880. He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in 2002. He failed to 
timely pay his federal taxes for three tax years. The evidence supports application of 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG 
¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The most significant delinquencies in the SOR are the three federal tax liens, 
which total almost $13,000. The 2002 and 2003 liens stem from unpaid business taxes; 
the 2006 lien relates to unpaid personal income taxes. Applicant stated he had 
insufficient funds to pay the taxes, and that the IRS granted him time to pay them after 
he found employment. AG ¶ 20(b) applies to the extent that Applicant had limited funds 
because of unemployment between 2004 and 2006, and intermittent employment from 
2006 to 2008. For full mitigation, an applicant is required to act reasonably under the 
circumstances. He acted reasonably by keeping the IRS informed of his status. 
However, Applicant has been employed full time since 2008. His salary has increased 
from $20,000 to $80,000, and he has amassed substantial savings in that time. He was 
 
 
17 
aware since completing his security clearance application in mid-2009 that his tax 
debts were a security concern, yet he did not pay his delinquent tax debts until 
December 2011. He paid the IRS a lump sum of almost $22,000 about three months 
before his security clearance hearing. His statement that he waited to pay it because 
he did not know how to pay online is not credible. Only partial mitigation is available 
under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) requires a good-faith effort to resolve debts. The Appeal Board has 
defined “good-faith” as conduct showing “reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. Such standards are consistent with the level of 
conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security clearance.”19 Applicant 
did not make a good-faith effort to pay his legitimate federal taxes because he waited 
to do so until he was forced by the security clearance process. AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant completed an online financial course in 2012, which was required as 
part of the Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. His two smaller SOR debts are unresolved. 
However, the 1996 debt of $880 is 16 years old, and the telephone debt, which he 
disputes, does not appear on his current credit report. In addition, the two debts total 
about $3,600 which, in light of Applicant's assets of almost $130,000, are not security-
significant. The federal tax liens represent the largest part of the SOR debts, and he 
resolved those debts. Applicant's financial situation is under control, and AG ¶ 20 (c) 
applies.  
 
 Applicant disputes the two unresolved debts. He believes the amount he owes 
for overseas telephone calls (allegation 3.e) should be $455 instead of $2,733. He also 
does not recognize the debt listed at allegation 3.f for $880. However, he did not 
provide documentation showing he has contacted the credit reporting agencies to 
formally dispute these debts. He receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
                                                 
19
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) 
 
 
18 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant had difficult relations during his employment 
at X, and his employers were not satisfied with his performance. Applicant was well 
aware of it, and had numerous complaints of his own about the situation. The manager 
at X had concerns about security issues raised by Applicant's conduct. Applicant had 
ample information from which to know he was terminated: he was told to “stand down,” 
his CAC card was taken, and he was ordered off the base. He notes in his own 
statement that one (unidentified) person told him he had been fired, and he was 
specifically told by a W manager, “You are dismissed from your job.” However, 
Applicant failed to inform the government that he had been terminated from his position 
with X and W when he completed his security clearance application in July 2009. He 
contends he left only because his contract had ended. He answered “No” to Question 
13(c)(1), which asked if, within the previous seven years, he had been fired, left a job 
under unfavorable circumstances, or been laid off. Even if Applicant did not realize he 
had been terminated, he knew the circumstances were unfavorable when he left W’s 
employment. He also answered “No” to question 13(c)(2), which asked if he had been 
disciplined for misconduct, and question 13(c)(3), which asked if he had been 
disciplined for security issues. He also stated in his October 2009 affidavit that he was 
 
 
19 
not involuntarily terminated, released from his duties, or counseled. At the hearing he 
continued to maintain that he was not fired. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 According to W and X, Applicant's conduct at times while he worked for coalition 
partner X was inappropriate. He acted in a belligerent manner toward a female NCO; 
continually complained about work assignments and that he was unfairly assigned long 
hours or bad shifts; failed to follow instructions regarding how to resolve complaints; 
was counseled and moved to various work areas because of personnel issues; and 
made complaints that related to classified matters. Applicant also failed to follow his 
supervisor’s orders by leaving the base on December 6 without being debriefed. AG ¶ 
17(d)(2) applies. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 The record contains no evidence that Applicant made an effort to correct his 
failure to disclose his termination on his security clearance application. He continued to 
state that he was never terminated when he completed his affidavit, during his security 
interview, and at the hearing. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply to Applicant's falsification.  
 
 Applicant's infractions while working at X for W, occurred six years ago; 
however, they were not minor or insignificant. His supervisor took steps to ameliorate 
Applicant's personnel issues by moving him to various other work areas, but the 
situation did not improve. Some of his actions raised security concerns as well. X 
characterized Applicant's conduct as “inappropriate for a military environment,” told him 
to stand down, and informed W that it did not wish to have Applicant work for X in the 
future. Applicant's conduct did not happen in unique circumstances, but during his daily 
work. His actions cast doubt on his judgment and reliability, and AG ¶ 17(c) does not 
apply. 
 
 Given the evidence showing Applicant's strong performance over the past four 
years, it is unlikely that a situation such as occurred in 2006 will recur. Several factors 
 
 
20 
likely combined to lead to personal conflicts during Applicant's employment by W. He 
was just beginning his career working in the rigors of a military environment, and his 
inexperience led him to act in a way that more seasoned military personnel deemed 
inappropriate. Since 2008, Applicant has worked for a defense contractor in 
Afghanistan, and the record includes no indication of personnel issues. He has learned 
from his experience with X and W. Moreover, he has done an outstanding job, based 
on the numerous character references from his current employer and military members 
who worked with him in the field. The issues that occurred in 2006 have not recurred, 
and are unlikely to recur in the future. I also conclude that Applicant did not state that 
he would talk to the Taliban and Al Qaida, based on the testimony of Applicant's 
witness, who worked with him in Afghanistan at the time, the letters of others who 
worked with him in the field, and Applicant's statement that he has supported U.S. 
forces by providing translations of Taliban conversations. AG ¶ 17(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant lives and works in Afghanistan. The risk of terrorist attacks is high, and 
safety and security are key issues. Terrorist groups such as al-Qaida and the Taliban 
target U.S. interests through violence, and disrupting and defeating them are key goals 
of the President. Residents of Afghanistan are subject to the dangers inherent in this 
situation. Applicant has lived in Afghanistan for the past four years, while he supported 
U.S. forces. However, Applicant's letters from co-workers, military members, and a 
government official repeatedly mention his willingness to protect U.S. personnel 
regardless of the danger to himself. The possibility of exploitation based on his family 
ties presents a concern, but as a former federal agent noted, Applicant’s actions show 
 
 
21 
that he has chosen U.S. interests despite the danger to himself and his family. His 
actions in support of the United States outweigh the Guideline B concerns.  
 
 Security concerns remain under Guidelines F and E. Applicant failed to pay his 
legitimate federal taxes for 2002, 2003, and 2006. He failed to pay these debts despite 
earning a substantial salary over the past few years that allowed him to amass 
$130,000 in savings. He resolved the liens in December 2011, but he did not take 
action until after he had received DOHA interrogatories in 2011, indicating that the 
resolution was likely in response to the security clearance process rather than a desire 
to meet his legitimate financial obligations. Applicant also demonstrated poor judgment 
when he failed to disclose his job termination on his security clearance application, at 
his security interview, in an affidavit he signed, and at his hearing.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised under the guidelines for financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the 
national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j  FOR Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.b   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.d   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.e   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f   Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 3.b   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.e   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 3.f   For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a   For Applicant 
 
 
22 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
