 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03594 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens of Afghanistan living in Afghanistan 
or Pakistan. He has worked for the U.S. Army as a linguist for two-and-one-half years. 
His relatives do not know he is living and working in Afghanistan. An attack by a suicide 
bomber placed him in the hospital for a week. He was offered six months of 
convalescence leave, but returned to his unit in Afghanistan after one month. Applicant 
has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under foreign influence and personal 
conduct.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 29, 2011, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
 On January 7, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. He asserted having a hearing would have required him to 
return to the United States and he did not know how long such a trip would keep him 
away from his unit. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), dated February 8, 2012. The FORM contains five 
attachments. On April 25, 2012, Applicant submitted a response to the FORM. 
Department Counsel did not object to the response, which was admitted into the record. 
On June 14, 2012, I was assigned the case.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan) and provided supporting documents to 
show detail and context for those facts. Applicant did not object or agree to the 
administrative notice request.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) 
(listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). I marked the documents as Ex. 
Exhibits I to VI. 
 
 See the Afghanistan section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the 
facts accepted for administrative notice. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he neither admitted nor denied the factual 
allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a. He admitted the remaining allegations. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old linquist who has been working for the U.S. Army in 
Afghanistan since October 2009. In 1964, he was born in Afghanistan where he went to 
high school and college. In September 2001, he became a U.S. citizen. In July 1986, in 
Afghanistan, he married his wife, then a citizen of Afghanistan. (Ex. 4) She is now a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
naturalized U.S. citizen. (Ex. 4) His oldest two children were born in Afghanistan and his 
two youngest children were born in the United States. His wife and children reside in the 
United States. His house (Fair Market Value of $350,000), his bank account ($80,000), 
his truck ($15,000), and his car ($10,000) are all in the United States. (Ex. 5) He has no 
financial obligations or legal obligations in a foreign country. (Ex. 5)  
 
Applicant’s parents, three of his brothers, and his sister are citizens and residents 
of Afghanistan. He also has a brother and sister who are citizens of Afghanistan 
residing in Pakistan. (Ex. 3) When he completed his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated October 22, 2009, he listed his parents, 
brothers, sisters, and parents-in-law, and indicated they were citizens of Afghanistan. 
(Ex. 4) He also indicated they were living in Afghanistan or Pakistan.  
 
Applicant stated in his response to the FORM:  
 
. . . for the past two and a half years and since I started this job and many 
years prior to that, I have had no contacts with my family members in 
Afghanistan or Pakistan. As a matter of fact my parents that live in 
Afghanistan are not even aware that I am working in Afghanistan and 
believe that I still work and live in the U.S. I did not want to jeopardize their 
lives by letting them know of my presence in Afghanistan and my work 
with the U.S. military.  
 
He has little knowledge about his siblings. He stated: 
 
. . . I have no knowledge of my family members (brothers and sisters) and 
their whereabouts, I do not concern myself with them and I should not be 
punished for not keeping up to date with them. They know nothing of my 
life and I know nothing about theirs and I would like to keep it that way. I 
do have a family of my own in U.S. and they are my main concern.  
 
Applicant’s duties in Afghanistan require him to go on convoy missions almost 
daily in dangerous areas. He must go into areas with Taliban sympathizers and 
question suspects and ordinary people. On one mission, he was injured, as were all the 
members of the team, when the convoy was attacked by a suicide bomber. He was 
wounded and spent a week in a hospital in Germany recovering from his wounds. He 
was offered six months convalescence leave with pay, but chose to return to 
Afghanistan after one month. He did so because of his sense of duty and loyalty to his 
unit, as well as his commitment to the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. He suffers from 
damage to one eye and is in continuous pain resulting from the bombing.  
 
Although facing danger continuously, Applicant feels good about and finds it 
satisfying to use his linguistic expertise to help his military colleagues. He believes the 
mission and safety of his team members comes first.  
 
 
4 
 
Applicant declined a hearing because he believed such a request would result in 
him having to return to the United States for an uncertain amount of time, which would 
place his team in danger and the U.S. mission at risk.  
 
On August 28, 2011, Applicant completed an interrogatory related to foreign 
influence, contacts, travel, and assets. (Ex. 5) The SOR alleges he deliberately omitted 
his foreign family members from that form. (Ex. 1) In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
neither admitted nor denied deliberately omitting his family members from the 
interrogatory. (Ex. 3) Department Counsel (DC) deemed his lack of a response to the 
allegation a denial. In his April 2012 response, Applicant states that any discrepancy on 
the questionnaire was an oversight and not a deliberate act.  
 
 The interrogatory, as presented in the FORM, fails to present any question 
asking about immediate family members’ foreign residence or citizenship. The 
interrogatory, as presented, failed to list a question 9 and question 10, 10.a, and 10.b. 
The hand written numbers at the lower right hand corner of the interrogatory goes from 
“154” to “165,” skipping page 156.  
 
 Applicant answered “no” to Question 13 of the interrogatory, which asks if he has 
ever had contact with a foreign citizen. Applicant’s parents and siblings are foreign 
citizens, but the FORM fails to establish he has had recent contact with his family 
members. He answered “no” to question 23, which asked if he owed a duty, obligation, 
or responsibility to any foreign person. The FORM fails to establish that he has any 
duty, obligation, or responsibility owed to his siblings or parents. 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
 Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.  
 
 In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target 
United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, 
 
5 
 
car-jacking, assaults, or hostage taking. At this time, the risk of terrorist activities 
remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence 
is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. 
Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from 
violence.  
 
 The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan, which are to 
disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, 
and to prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . The United States is willing 
to support fully the ambitious agenda set out by the recently re-elected 
Afghan president, focusing on reintegration, economic development, 
improving relations with Afghanistan regional partners, and steadily 
increasing the security responsibilities of the Afghan security forces. 
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, November 28, 2011. (Ex. I) 
The United States has more combat troops deployed to Afghanistan than to any other 
foreign country. This extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against the 
inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan to citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
6 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6, as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
7 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 An applicant’s ties to a foreign country, through family members or others, can 
raise a foreign influence concern. At the same time, there is no per se rule against 
applicants with familial ties to a foreign country, even hostile countries. Instead, an 
applicant with familial ties to a country, such as Afghanistan, bears a “very heavy 
burden” in mitigating the foreign influence concern raised by their familial ties.2  
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan and became a naturalized U.S citizen. His 
parents and siblings live in Afghanistan. He also has siblings living in Pakistan. His 
relatives are sufficient to raise a foreign influence concern, and the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.3 
 
 As noted above, Applicant’s foreign connections and contacts do not end the 
Guideline B analysis. Nor is Applicant required to cut off all contact with his relatives to 
meet his burden.4 Instead, he has the “very heavy burden” of demonstrating that one or 
more of the following pertinent mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 applies and, more 
importantly, that such is sufficient to mitigate the serious security concerns at issue: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011) (In examining a case involving an 
applicant with familial ties to Iran, the Appeal Board held: “We note, first of all, that an applicant with 
family members in a country that is hostile to the U.S. bears a “very heavy burden” to show that the family 
members are not a means of coercion or exploitation.”).  
 
3
 I considered AG ¶ 7(c), but Applicant does not share living quarters with his parents. 
 
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008) (“To the extent that the Judge’s 
statement about ties to the former country implies or asserts that any such ties automatically create a 
situation of heightened risk, that statement is error. Obviously, the nature and strength of those ties is 
important in an accurate assessment of the overall risk, and there is no requirement under the Directive 
that an applicant sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access to classified 
information.”) (emphasis in original). 
 
8 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant rebutted the presumption that he is close to his parents and siblings in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan.5 He has not had contact with his family members for many 
years prior to working with the U.S. military, which started two and a half years ago. He 
does not keep up with his family members in Afghanistan or Pakistan. They are 
unaware of the nature of his employment or that he is under consideration for a security 
clearance. At the same time, I cannot overlook the obvious family dynamic, which 
implicates serious concerns due to the nature of the situation in Afghanistan and the 
threat to his family members should it become known he is working with the U.S. 
military. Therefore, I find that AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) partially apply, but would be insufficient 
on their own to mitigate the foreign influence concern.  
 
 On the other hand, I find that AG ¶ 8(b) applies and, together with the above, 
mitigates the foreign influence concern. Applicant has strong connections to the United 
States. His wife and children live in the United States, who are his main concern. All of 
his assets including his house, bank account, and vehicles are in the United States. 
Applicant has no foreign property or foreign financial interest. His goal is to use his 
linguistic expertise to help his military colleagues.  
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is unquestionable. He was not only 
injured in the performance of his duties, but turned down paid convalescence leave in 
order to return to Afghanistan one month after his release from the hospital. While 
performing his duty with the U.S. military, he was injured and is in continuous pain. 
 
 In weighing Applicant’s strong connections to the United States with the lack of 
contact he has had with his parents and siblings, I find that he would resolve any 
potential conflict in favor of national security. Applicant met his burden of persuasion 
and mitigated the foreign influence concern. 
 
                                                          
 
5
 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 08-02715 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2010) (Applicant speaks with her 
father, a general in Country X, once every other week).  
 
9 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The following personal conduct disqualifying conditions potentially apply to the facts of 
this case:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government, when applying for a security clearance, 
is a security concern. But the document presented is incomplete and fails to establish a 
falsification. The SOR alleges Applicant failed to list his foreign family members on an 
August 2011 interrogatory. The incomplete interrogatory, as presented in the FORM, 
does not include questions regarding foreign family members. DC assumed Applicant’s 
non-response to this allegation in his SOR response was a denial, which placed the 
burden on DC to present evidence establishing the allegation. This DC did not do. 
Applicant listed all of his foreign relatives in his e-QIP. He denies any deliberate 
falsification of the interrogatory.  
 
DC has failed to prove Applicant deliberately failed to disclose information about 
his immediate family being foreign citizens. A falsification must be deliberate and 
material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully.  
 
 The evidence, as presented in the FORM, fails to establish any deliberate 
omissions, concealments, or falsifications in the interrogatory. I find for him as to 
personal conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
10 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has put himself in harm’s 
way in order to support U.S. security interests. He was injured in the performance of 
that duty and chose to return to the mission early. He is keenly aware of the danger to 
his family members should it become known he is supporting the U.S. military mission. 
His parents and siblings are in Afghanistan and Pakistan. He does not concern himself 
with what these family members do or their whereabouts. His main concern is with his 
family in the United States. I find Applicant to be loyal to the United States and would do 
nothing to compromise U.S. interests. Based on the record as presented, I find no 
falsification by Applicant in completing the interrogatory. He made a complete listing of 
all of his relatives on his e-QIP and I find there would be no recognizable benefit for him 
to not list these same individuals when he completed the interrogatory.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence 
and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
   
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
