 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07913  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the financial 
considerations guideline. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on April 12, 2010, to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). On February 29, 2012, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DoD directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. The SOR listed security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
 
2 
 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). In his answer to the SOR, dated March 15, 
2013, Applicant admitted all 16 allegations, and requested a decision without a hearing. 
(Item 4) 
 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)1 in support of 
the Government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request. The FORM was 
forwarded to Applicant on April 11, 2012, and he received it on April 16, 2012. He was 
given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to file a response. Applicant did not 
submit a response. The case was assigned to me on June 21, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s response to 
the SOR, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years of age. He married in 1995, separated in 2007, and 
divorced in 2009. He has two children who are 12 and 16 years of age. His children live 
with his ex-wife. Applicant has been living with a cohabitant since August 2009. 
Applicant worked as a warehouse manager from 2000 to 2007. He then had several 
periods of unemployment: September 2007 to February 2008; April to September 2008; 
and September to December 2009. In December 2009, he began his current position as 
a stock clerk for a defense contractor. This is his first application for a security 
clearance. (Items 5, 6) 
 
 At his May 2010 security interview, Applicant described several events that 
affected his financial status over the past few years. After working for a company for 
seven years, Applicant was laid off in 2007 because of the poor economy. He received 
severance pay and collected unemployment compensation. Applicant stated in his 
Answer that several SOR debts (rent and his children’s school clothes, which are 
alleged at ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, and 1.j) became delinquent after he was laid off. (Items 4, 6) 
 
 Applicant separated from his wife in 2007. He stated that she remained in the 
marital home, continued to use the credit cards, and failed to pay the household bills. 
Applicant pays $585 in monthly child support; he is current on that obligation. Applicant 
continued to pay on his accounts until his unemployment in 2008. He supported himself 
with unemployment compensation and credit cards. During his unemployment in 2009, 
he lived with his brother and was supported by his brother and sister. Applicant's mother 
became ill, and Applicant paid for some of her expenses. When she passed away in 
September 2009, he shared the funeral expenses with his four siblings. He is currently 
paying his sister $100 monthly on his $2,200 share of those expenses. (Item 6) 
 
                                                          
1
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 - 8) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 During his 2010 security interview, Applicant said he was considering using a 
debt consolidation program. More recently, in his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated 
that he plans to pay his bills by paying off the smallest debts first. None of his financial 
problems result from alcohol, illegal drug use, or criminal conduct. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant’s February 2012 personal financial statement (PFS) shows that he and 
his cohabitant earn $7,600 net monthly income. His monthly expenses are $7,000, 
leaving a monthly net remainder of $600. He states that his household bills are current. 
He did not list any assets or payments on any SOR debts. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant admitted the debts alleged in the SOR, which are currently charged off 
or in collection status. These debts, which total $34,654, appear in Applicant's credit 
reports of April 2010 and January 2012. Applicant provided a credit report dated 
February 2, 2012, which lists 13 negative accounts. Applicant stated, and his credit 
report shows, that he maintained consistent payments on his automobile loan, and it is 
now paid in full. He has two credit cards with low credit limits that he opened in an effort 
to re-establish good credit. He pays them on time. He sought, but has been unable to 
find, part-time employment. (Items 4, 6, 7, 8) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
                                                          
2
 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including debts which became 
delinquent between 2007 and 2010. As of the date of the SOR, he had past-due debts 
totaling more than $34,000. His history of failing to meet his financial obligations 
supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions can potentially mitigate security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
                                                          
4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Although Applicant’s debts started to become delinquent five years ago, they are 
not in the distant past because the 16 debts alleged in the SOR are still delinquent. His 
unresolved financial situation casts doubt on his reliability, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be 
applied. 
 
 Starting in 2007, several circumstances affected Applicant's ability to meet his 
financial obligations. He separated from his wife, and she stopped paying the household 
bills, and continued to use their credit cards. Applicant contributed to his mother’s 
support when she became ill, and shared in her funeral expenses when she passed 
away. He was laid off from his job in 2007, and had periods of intermittent employment 
and unemployment between 2007 and 2009. For AG ¶ 20(b) to apply in full, an 
applicant must act reasonably in response to the unforeseen circumstances. Here, 
Applicant has not acted reasonably. He has been employed full-time since 2009. His 
cohabitant also contributes substantially to the household income. Applicant discussed 
seeking assistance from a debt consolidation company, but the file contains no 
evidence that between 2010 and 2012 he has taken such a step. Applicant has 
approximately $700 remaining each month with which he could have taken action on his 
debts. Applicant did not act reasonably, and receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(b).  
 
 Applicant states that he has paid $10,000 to pay off his auto loan in full. 
However, he provided no evidence of payments, a payment plan, or any efforts related 
to his other debts, other than statements that he will begin to work on them, despite 
having a monthly net remainder that he could have used for this purpose. Applicant has 
not made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts, and his finances are not under control. 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant is a mature, 38-year-old adult. Over the past five years, he has 
accrued more than $34,000 in delinquent debt. He was put on notice that delinquent 
debts are a security concern when he completed his security clearance application in 
April 2010, and again during his security interview in July 2010. Applicants are not 
required to be debt-free; however, they are expected to develop a plan to resolve their 
SOR debts, and provide evidence of conduct to implement that plan. To date, Applicant 
has provided no evidence of a credible plan to deal with the SOR debts, or evidence 
that he has begun making payments on them. Accordingly, the Government’s doubts 
about Applicant's suitability to hold a security clearance remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
