 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-03591 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Alcohol Consumption concern. Applicant’s alcohol use 
resulted in convictions in 2004 and 2009 for driving under the influence (DUI). After her 
last DUI in 2009, Applicant voluntarily entered treatment, became actively involved in 
Alcoholics Anonymous, and has since abstained from alcohol. Applicant’s past alcohol 
use no longer casts doubt on her current judgment and reliability. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
G (Alcohol Consumption).1 On March 10, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) 
and requested a hearing. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On April 10, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed. I was assigned the case on April 19, 2012 and, after coordinating with the 
parties, scheduled the hearing for May 24, 2012. At hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant appeared at the hearing, testified, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through D.2 These documents were also admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on June 5, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in her fifties. She graduated in the mid-1980s from college with a 
degree in marine engineering and then immediately began working for a federal 
contractor. When her former employer closed down its shipbuilding division, Applicant 
was hired by her current employer. She has been with her current employer for over 25 
years and has held a security clearance since 1986 without incident.3 
 
Applicant was arrested in 2004 for DUI after having consumed wine earlier in the 
evening. She was convicted and ordered to attend an alcohol safety and education 
program. She successfully completed the program and complied with all other terms of 
her sentence. At the time, Applicant chalked up the incident to just being at the “wrong 
place, [at the] wrong time.”4 She voluntarily reported her 2004 DUI on her current 
security clearance application.5  
 
Applicant was again arrested in 2009 for DUI. Prior to the arrest, Applicant had 
been drinking wine at home during the early evening hours and got hungry. She drove 
to a local fast food restaurant and was pulled over by the police, who witnessed her 
driving erratically. Applicant realized, as this was her second incident involving alcohol, 
that she had a problem with alcohol and “no longer considered it was wrong place, 
wrong time, or just bad luck.”6 Prior to going to court, Applicant voluntarily entered an 
intensive outpatient treatment program through her employer’s employee assistance 
program. Even though there was no breathalyzer result to confirm the police officer’s 
observation, Applicant accepted responsibility for her conduct and pled guilty to the DUI 
charge. She has complied with the terms of her sentence and successfully completed 
the treatment program.7 Applicant reported her 2009 DUI to her employer’s security 
                                                          
2
 AE D is Applicant’s complete Answer. 
 
3
 Tr. at 27-28, 41; GE 1. 
 
4
 Tr. at 28, 46-47. See also GE 3. 
 
5
 GE 1 at 23. 
 
6
 Tr. at 29.  
 
7
 Tr. at 29-36, 43-47; GE 2 – GE 4; AE D. 
 
 
3 
 
 
office, because she recognized from her security training that she was required to report 
this adverse information regardless of the potential consequences.8 
 
Applicant has been actively participating in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) since her 
2009 DUI arrest. Her sponsor, “a recovering alcoholic with 17 years of sobriety,” writes: 
 
I have come to know [Applicant] over the past two years through her 
involvement in AA. She started attending this weekly group meeting in 
August of 2009 when she picked up a White Chip, (the universal sign of 
surrender) and hasn’t looked back since. She has actively participated in 
our group and has steadily increased her involvement and level of 
commitment over the past two years. . . . [Applicant] has shown great 
resolve . . . and is actively involved in working the 12 Step Program.9  
 
The Medical Director for the intensive treatment program that Applicant 
voluntarily attended states that “[b]ased on [Applicant’s] participating in group, optimistic 
attitude and her commitment to sobriety her prognosis is very positive.”10  
 
Applicant considers herself an alcoholic and does not allow others to define her 
disease or downplay her issues with alcohol.11 She recognizes that she cannot even 
have one drink of wine, because “the first one opens up the gate, for me to want 
more.”12 She has not consumed alcohol since her 2009 DUI arrest.13 At hearing, 
Applicant explained her conscious decision not to use alcohol again as follows: 
 
[W]hen I first started going to AA meetings . . . there was a gentleman in 
the meetings. He has just celebrated 19 years of sobriety. . . . And he 
would always say, if you think taking a drink is a good idea, play the whole 
tape. Play the tape, when you are having fun, and where you ended up. 
And . . . I will be in situations, if I'm in a restaurant [and] people are having 
a drink, or if I'm going to an outing, and people are going to have a beer, I 
might look at them and I'm thinking, don't worry, I play the whole tape, I 
play the tape. Because I have ended up in a place where I didn't want to 
be. And no drink could taste that good to me. It is not worth it to me.14 
 
                                                          
8
 Tr. at 41-43.  
 
9
 GE 4 at 93.  
 
10
 GE 3 at 119.  
 
11
 Tr. at 38-40, 48-52.  
 
12
 Tr. at 51.  
 
13
 Tr. at 32.  
 
14
 Tr. at 51.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. “In analyzing cases before them, judges must be 
guided by common sense and with a view toward making a reasoned determination 
consistent with the interests of national security.”15 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.16 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
Analysis 
                                                          
15
 ISCR Case No. 11-03452 at 5 (App. Bd. June 6, 2012).  
 
16
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern regarding excessive alcohol consumption is articulated at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s past alcohol use and two DUIs raises this concern. It also triggers 
application of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the excessive 
alcohol consumption concern:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Applicant last consumed alcohol nearly three years ago. She successfully 
completed an intensive alcohol-treatment program and, based upon her level of 
participation and positive attitude, received a favorable prognosis. She continues to 
actively participate in AA, has had no relapses, and established a genuine commitment 
to her sobriety. Applicant met her high burden of persuasion and demonstrated that her 
use of alcohol no longer serves as an avenue to question her reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) through 23(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).17 After her second DUI in a five year time span, 
Applicant recognized that she had a problem with alcohol and voluntarily sought out 
treatment. Her words and actions demonstrate that she is committed to living an 
alcohol-free lifestyle. She has properly handled classified information since 1986 without 
incident and placed her security obligations above her own self-interest when she self-
reported the alcohol-related incidents.18 These whole-person factors, in conjunction with 
the favorable matters noted above, fully mitigate the alcohol consumption concern. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        For Applicant 
 
                                                          
17
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
18
 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 11-05079 (App. Bd. June 6, 2012) (Applicant’s failure to report 
own security violation was inconsistent with his security obligations). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
