                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------                   )      ISCR Case No. 10-02969
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Shawn Potter, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated financial consideration concerns, but has mitigated personal
conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied
Statement of the Case
On June 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1962), as amended (Directive); and the
2
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of Defense on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 16, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on March 30, 2012, and was scheduled for hearing on
May 9, 2012.  At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of 11 exhibits (GEs 1-
11); Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 13 exhibits (AEs A-M). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on May 16, 2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payments of his
federal taxes covered by the federal tax lien listed in subparagraph 1.a of the SOR.
There being no objections, and for good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to
supplement the record. The Government was afforded one day to respond. For good
cause shown, Applicant was granted an additional 14 days to supplement the record.
Applicant did not provide any additional documentation and later affirmed that the IRS
did not maintain records back to the years in issue. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) incurred an IRS federal tax lien in
August 2002 covering unpaid taxes totaling $22,800; (b) incurred a state tax lien
covering unpaid state taxes of $82; (c) accrued three judgments (unsatisfied) totaling
$670, $1,625, and $5,000, respectively; and (d) accumulated a delinquent medical
account of $364 and traffic fine of $150. Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified
material facts in the security clearance application he completed in December 2009 by
omitting his entered tax liens.  
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied each of the covered allegations. He
claimed the IRS lien was released because of the expiration of the relevant statute of
limitations in 2000. He claimed the state tax lien was recorded in error and was
acknowledged as such. Applicant also claimed the recorded judgment covered by
subparagraph 1.d is no longer enforceable. He claimed the listed judgment covered by
subparagraph 1.c has been paid, and the judgment covered by subparagraph 1.e was
resolved by a previous bankruptcy discharge. Applicant claimed the remaining two debts
covered by subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g have been paid.
Addressing the falsification allegations in the SOR, Applicant claimed he
considered the federal tax lien to have been filed in error and is no longer actionable.  He
claimed one of the listed judgments (the one covered by subparagraph 1.c) was not
known to him at the time, and the remaining two listed judgments (covered in
subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e) were beyond the seven-year scope of questioning and are
no longer actionable. He claimed he was not aware of the other listed debts and did not
3
find them reported in the credit report he pulled in December 2009.  And he explained he
was not aware of any delinquent federal debts when he completed his e-QIP in
December 2009. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old analyst for a defense contractor. He seeks a security
clearance. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in January 1998 and has two step-children from this marriage
(ages 24 and 26).  He has a high school diploma and no claims to college credits. (Tr.
34)
 Applicant enlisted in the Army in January 1980 and served a brief period of active
duty in the Army and a number of years of inactive duty before he received an honorable
discharge in January 1986. (AE M) He joined his state’s Army National Guard in
November 1989 and several years of active duty before transferring to the inactive
reserve. (AE M; Tr. 29)  He received his honorable discharge in March 1993. (GE 1 and
AE M)
Applicant’s finances 
Between 1991 and 2004, Applicant did not file federal and state tax returns. (Tr.
80-81) He claims that he later filed his back federal and state returns but provided no
documentation to corroborate his claims. (Tr. 81-82)  In August 2002, the IRS filed a
federal tax lien covering unpaid taxes for tax years 1991-1994, totaling $22,800. (GEs 3
and 4) In July 2011, he received a letter from the IRS’s tax advocate  advising that the
expiration date for collection of the listed underlying taxes expired in 2005. (AE A) 
Because of the federal lien’s expiration by operation of law, Applicant’s taxes
covered by the lien are no longer due. The tax advocate’s 2011 letter made no mention
of any paid taxes or credited taxes for the covered years of 1991-1994, and no tax
payments or credit can be implied from the tax advocate’s letter. 
Applicant claimed tax refunds for a number of years prior to 2005 and indicated
the tax advocate advised him he could expect tax returns (i.e., IRS generated returns
from available tax information from the tax payer) from “2006 forward.” (Tr. 42) However,
Applicant could not estimate what he owed in back federal and state taxes or what
refunds for tax years 1999-2005 were withheld to cover his owed back taxes. (Tr. 83-84)
Afforded a post-hearing opportunity to document his paid back federal taxes, he
communicated that he could produce no documentary proof of his payments. 
4
Besides the federal tax lien in place, his county taxing authority filed a state tax
lien for $82 in April 2006. (GE 4) Applicant claimed this lien was filed in error and
provided proof to back his claims. (AE B) County records document that this lien was
released in January 2007, freeing Applicant of any liability for any taxes covered by this
lien. 
Three judgments were entered against Applicant between April 1999 and August
2005. (GE 4) One of the judgments involves a hospital claim against Applicant in the
amount of $670. Applicant disputed this judgment but paid it off in July 2011. (AE C) A
judgment entered against Applicant in December 2000 for $1,625, and covered by
subparagraph 1.d, expired by operation of law in December 2010 after the judgment
creditor failed re-register its judgment following the expiration of his state’s 10-year
judgment enforcement allowance. A third judgment, covered by subparagraph 1.e of the
SOR, was entered against Applicant in April 1999 and was discharged in his 2000
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (AE E; Tr. 38) Applicant is no longer liable on this judgment. His
creditor 1.d judgment was not scheduled in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy and was not
discharged. (AE E) 
The remaining debts covered in the SOR (creditors 1.f and 1.g) for $150 and
$364, respectively, were paid by Applicant. (AEs F and K; Tr. 56-59) Applicant’s credit
report reveals he is current with his other debts and obligations. (AE K)
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
Asked to complete a security clearance application (e-QIP) in December 2009,
Applicant answered “No” to Section 26 inquiries about his financial obligations
accumulated within the past seven years. Section 26 covered federal and state tax
debts, failure to file federal and state tax returns, adverse judgments, debts over 90 days
delinquent, and and delinquencies on federal debts. (GE 1)  
Citing uncertainty over whether he needed to list tax liens and judgments that are
no longer enforceable due to time expirations on collection, he denied any deliberate
intent to omit the information. (Tr.81) He assured he did not mean to lie or deceive the
Government about his finances.  
Although the questions posed to Applicant in his e-QIP are straight forward,
clearly stated, and leave little objective room for confusion or misunderstanding, specific
intent and materiality are key elements of falsification in omission cases. Applicant
impresses as honest and forthcoming about his business and personal affairs, and
reported his answers based on his best interpretations of the questions at the time. So,
while the questions posed to Applicant are material ones requiring honest responses, no
deliberate falsification can be inferred from his answers. 
Considering Applicant’s explanations for his omissions, Applicant’s explanations
are accepted. Inferences warrant that his omissions of his tax liens, judgments, tax
5
filings, and underlying debt delinquencies were the result of his misreading of the
questions. Applicant’s omissions were not motivated by any specific intent to falsify or
deceive the Government. 
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by his superiors and colleagues who have worked
with him in combat situations in Afghanistan. His military program superiors credit his
valuable leadership in providing exceptional and unique support to the overall mission
(AE G) Former military and civilian superiors and colleagues credit Applicant with superb
analysis and recommendations on the foreign missions he supported. (AE J)  Applicant’s
employment evaluations contain superior assessments in most of the listed categories
and credit Applicant with overall excellent judgment, thinking outside of the box, and
superior execution of all of his assignments. (AE H) His military separation records note
numerous decorations, medals, and citations.  (AE M) 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[conditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
6
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to
financial crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained
by known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. AG , ¶ 18.
         Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
 By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
7
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a meritorious defense analyst who accumulated a federal tax lien
covering unpaid taxes for several back years, several judgments, and a couple of small
delinquent debts. While several of the listed obligations have been paid (creditors 1.c,
1.f, and 1.g) or discharged in bankruptcy (creditor 1.e), others have not. For the most
part, Applicant relies on statutes of limitation to exempt him from any continuing liability
on these remaining debts.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
AGs when an individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of unpaid federal taxes covered by a federal
tax lien (since expired by operation of law), adverse judgments (one paid, one
discharged in a prior bankruptcy, and one expired by operation of law) and his inability to
furnish corroborating proof that he resolved all of his back federal and state taxes
accrued through years of failing to file federal and state tax returns warrant the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: ¶ DC 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.” 
Because Applicant’s failure to file federal and state tax returns were not included
in the SOR, they are not subject to specific disqualifying conditions. They may be
considered, however, in evaluating Applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or
changed circumstances, his claims of demonstrated financial rehabilitation, and his
whole-person claims. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citing
8
ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. March 15, 2004) and ISCR case No. 00-0633 at
3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Extenuating circumstances are difficult to find. Applicant offered no excuses for
his failure to file his federal and state tax returns for tax years 1991-2004, or
corroborating proof that he paid the assessed taxes for those filing years. He provided no
reasons for why he failed to address the SOR 1.e judgment before this creditor permitted
its judgment to expire by operation of law. Military-related deployments provide good
reasons for obtaining federal and state filing and payment extensions, but Applicant
provided no evidence of whether he ever sought or obtained any filing waivers. MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances,” has little application to Applicant’s situation without more compelling
proof.
For Applicant to be able to take advantage of other mitigating conditions like MC ¶
20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,” and the counseling/control requirements of  MC ¶ 20(c, “the person has
received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control, ” he would need to offer updated payment information
on his federal and state taxes and his use of counseling services.  
While he likely obtained counseling in connection with his Chapter 7 bankruptcy
petition, he provided no evidence of any recent counseling.  As a result, he is entitled to
very limited application of MC ¶ 20(c).  Because of his limited repayment efforts, MC ¶
20(d) is only partially applicable to Applicant’s situation.  For while an applicant need not
have paid or resolved every one of his proven debts or addressed all of his debts
simultaneously, he needs a credible plan to resolve his financial problems, accompanied
by implementing actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-06488 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) By the
proofs presented, Applicant has no current plan in effect to pay any of his back federal
and state taxes or the underlying debt covered by creditor 1.d’s expired judgment. 
To be sure, virtually all of Applicant’s SOR debts are now time-barred by pertinent
federal and state statutes of limitations. Over time, the Appeal Board has shown general
consistency in disallowing applicant claims to mitigation based on charge-offs and
limitation bars on debts previously unpaid due to cited extenuating circumstances and
other reasons. Cf. ISCR Case No. 07-16427 at 3-4 and n.6 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010);
9
ISCR Case No. 08-01122 at 5 and n.3 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009) No different application of
the mitigation guidelines are warranted in Appellant’s situation with respect to his now
expired federal tax lien and state laws covering back state taxes and expired judgments. 
                                              
Consideration of Applicant’s background and circumstances surrounding his debt
accumulations and his lack of corroborating proofs of his paying his back federal and
state taxes makes it very difficult to credit Applicant with the degree of good judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness necessary to security clearance eligibility criteria. While
Applicant’s superb record of military and civilian service (both in and out of combat
zones) is noted and commended, his corrective efforts taken to date to resolve his
finances are insufficient to enable him to meet his evidentiary burden.  
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted sufficient good-faith efforts to resolve his tax and judgment-
covered debts. In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given
to the respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts
and circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the financial
considerations guideline. 
                                          
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his omissions of his tax liens, judgments, and
debts over 90 days delinquent in the e-QIP he completed in December 2009. By omitting
his tax liens and judgments, and other debts over 90 days delinquent, Applicant failed to
furnish potentially material background information about his financial history that was
needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate his security clearance
application. DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts to any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” applies.  
Because Applicant’s omissions of his covered financial obligations in his
completed e-QIP are considered to be the result of mistakes in reading and interpreting
the question, no acts of falsification may be imputed to him. In evaluating all of the
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s e-QIP omissions, his explanations, and whole-
person considerations, his disclosures are sufficient to enable him to convincingly refute
or mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, are each core policy
concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15). Overall, Applicant’s explanations
are persuasive that his omissions of his financial obligations in the 2009 e-QIP he
completed were the result of mistake. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by the personal conduct guideline. 
10
Form  a  l Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas 1.a and 1.d :            Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):                     FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a :                       For Applicant 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
       
11
