 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00602 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James P. Beadle, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F and B. DOHA took that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 9, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted a notification that the Government was ready to proceed 
on February 23, 2012. The case was assigned to me on February 28, 2012. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on March 8, 2012, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on March 28, 2012.  
 
2 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
8 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s list of 
exhibits was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. In documents marked as HE 2 and HE 
3, Department Counsel requested that administrative notice be taken of facts 
concerning the Kyrgyz Republic, also known as Kyrgyzstan, and the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE). Applicant’s Counsel objected to documents attached to the 
administrative notice requests on the grounds of relevancy because they addressed 
events that happened in the distant past. His objections were overruled and the 
requests for administrative notice were granted. Applicant testified and offered exhibits 
(AE) A through L that were admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
The record was held open until April 11, 2012, for Applicant’s Counsel to submit 
additional information. Based on a request from Applicant’s Counsel, an extension of 
that deadline was granted until April 25, 2012. Applicant’s Counsel timely submitted AE 
M through FF. Department Counsel objected to AE W, X, Y, CC, DD, EE, and FF, which 
included a practice guideline on foreclosures, regulations, and state court opinions. 
Department Counsel appeared to be objecting on the grounds of relevancy and noted 
that, to the degree these documents may be relevant, they may be admitted for 
administrative notice. Department Counsel’s objections are overruled and AE M through 
FF are admitted into evidence. HE 4 is Department Counsel’s memorandum forwarding 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 
5, 2012.1 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the hearing, Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement in 
Paragraph E3.1.8 of the Directive.2  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
SOR and Applicant’s Answer 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant had two delinquent 
mortgages totaling $212,000. It indicated that one mortgage in the amount of $134,000 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) went into foreclosure and the other in the amount of $78,000 (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
was charged off. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. and 
indicated that he did not have sufficient facts to admit or deny the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. He 
also stated he had had no obligation to repay the mortgage in SOR 1.b if it has been 
charged off.3   
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 27-32. The exhibits that Department Counsel objected to have probative value in resolving 
issues presented in this case. 
 
2 Tr. 11-12. 
3  Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2, 3, 5. 
 
3 
 
Under Guideline B, the SOR alleged that his wife was a citizen of Kyrgyzstan and 
resident of the United States (SOR ¶ 2.a), that his mother-in-law was a citizen and 
resident of Kyrgyzstan (SOR ¶ 2.b), and that his sister-in-law was a citizen of 
Kyrgyzstan and resident of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) (SOR ¶ 2.c). In his Answer, 
Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a stating his wife is a citizen and resident of 
the United States, and admitted the other two Guideline B allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact.4 
 
Applicant and His Family 
 
Applicant was born in the United States. He is a 53-year-old senior consultant 
and has been working for his current employer since January 2008. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Air Force (USAF) from 1976 to 2001, and retired honorably in the grade 
of master sergeant (E-7). He earned an associate’s degree in January 1996. He has 
continually worked for defense contractors since retiring from the military. He has been 
married four times. His first marriage was from 1977 to 1979. Between 1981 and 2002, 
he was married twice to the same woman. Each of those prior marriages ended in 
divorce. He married his current wife in September 2007. He has three daughters, ages 
28, 24, and 23. He has held a security clearance for over 30 years without incident.5 
 
Applicant’s current wife was born in Kyrgyzstan. She is 35 years old. He met her 
through a friend when he was working for a defense contractor in Korea. At the time, 
she was working for a folk dance troop in Korea and was a citizen of Kyrgyzstan. When 
they started dating, he reported his contact with her to his company’s security officer. 
Since their marriage, she has visited both Kyrgyzstan and UAE once after her father 
passed away. She became a U.S. citizen in September 2011.6 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and part-time resident of Kyrgyzstan. She 
was born in Russia and is 67 years old. Earlier in her life she worked in the medical 
profession, but has not worked in the past 30 years. She owns a condominium in 
Kyrgyzstan. She never worked for the Government of Kyrgyzstan or its military. She 
resides with her other daughter in the UAE during the winters and in Kyrgyzstan for the 
remainder of the year. Applicant’s wife communicates with her mother a couple of times 
a month. In responding to interrogatories in July 2011, Applicant indicated that he never 
met his mother-in-law in person. He communicates with her about once a month 
through an Internet video program. His communications with her are limited because 
she does not speak English and he speaks only a few phrases in Russian. He and his 
wife occasionally send his mother-in-law about $200 per month. His wife submitted a 
petition for her mother to become a permanent resident of the United States.7 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1. 
5 Tr. 43-48, 57-59, 74-79; GE 1, 8. 
6 Tr. 47-48, 53, 84-86; GE 1, 4, 6; AE E, F. 
7 Tr. 48-52, 79-82, 114, 117-119; GE 1, 4, 6; AE G. 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s sister-in-law is a citizen of Kyrgyzstan and a resident of UAE. She is 
about 37 years old, single, and has a 16-year-old daughter. She has resided in the UAE 
for about ten years. She is a manager of a textile company that manufactures plastic 
bags. To Applicant’s knowledge, his sister-in-law never worked for any governmental 
entity in UAE or Kyrgyzstan. Applicant communicates with his sister-in-law about once a 
month through an Internet video program. In responding to interrogatories in July 2011, 
he indicated that he never met his sister-in-law in person.8 
 
Applicant has never traveled to either Kyrgyzstan or the UAE. He and his wife 
own no property outside the United States. Besides her sister, Applicant’s wife has no 
other siblings. She has no contact with any individuals in Kyrgyzstan other than her 
mother.9 
 
Alleged Delinquent Debts 
 
In 1998, Applicant and his second wife divorced. In February 2000, they 
remarried and later purchased a house together. The mortgage on this house was for 
about $134,000. The house and mortgage were in both of their names. Their monthly 
mortgage payments were about $1,200. They divorced again in 2002. She is hereinafter 
referred to as his “ex-wife.”10  
 
Before their divorce, Applicant and his ex-wife entered into a marital settlement 
agreement that was later incorporated into their divorce decree. The settlement 
agreement provided that the house was to be placed for sale when they mutually 
agreed to do so. Any proceeds of the sale were to be divided equally between them. 
Until the house was sold, they agreed to both retain possession of it, and he was 
responsible for making the monthly mortgage payments on the property and for all 
upkeep and repairs regardless of who occupied the house. After the divorce, they 
essentially owned the house as tenants in common. Under the marital settlement 
agreement, he was also responsible for paying her $500 per month in alimony until 
either of them died or she remarried. She also receives half of his military retirement 
pay.11 
 
In January 2003, Applicant obtained a job working for a defense contractor in 
Korea. His ex-wife and daughters continued to reside in the house, and he continued to 
pay the mortgage. In April 2005, he executed a special real estate power of attorney 
                                                          
8 Tr. 51-52, 83,-84, 118-119; GE 7.  
9 Tr. 52, 54-56, 86-88, 118. 
10 Tr. 57-60; GE 1, 4, 7, 8; AE A, B. Applicant’s ex-wife was born in Thailand. He and his ex-wife 
also owned another property that is not an issue in this proceeding. This other property was sold in 2005 
or 2206. See Tr. 106, 112; GE 7. 
11 Tr. 57-60, 74-75, 88-91; GE 1, 4, 7; AE A, B, Q.  
 
5 
 
authorizing his ex-wife to sell, refinance, or perform any acts that he could in regards to 
the property. The power of attorney contained no termination date.12 
 
In October 2006, Applicant opened a home equity line of credit (HELOC) that 
created a second mortgage on the house. The HELOC authorized him to withdraw as 
much as $120,000 from this account. He initially withdrew about $12,000 to pay some 
debts. His monthly payments for that initial withdrawal were about $200.13 
 
In May 2007, one of Applicant’s daughters was seriously injured in an automobile 
accident. She was in intensive care for 89 days and then went through approximately 
six weeks of rehabilitation. He returned from Korea for three to four months to be with 
his daughter during her recovery. He then withdrew appropriately $45,000 from the 
HELOC to cover his living expenses and his daughter’s bills. With that withdrawal, the 
monthly payments on the HELOC increased to about $600. After her release from the 
hospital, she resided in Applicant’s and his ex-wife’s house while going through 
rehabilitation. When Applicant returned to Korea, his daughters knew that he was 
planning to marry his current wife. He assumed then that his daughters would tell his 
ex-wife of his upcoming marriage. Shortly after his return to Korea, he married his 
current wife. In about January 2008, he returned to the United States to start a new job 
with his current employer.14 
 
Upon his return from Korea, Applicant and his new wife moved into his and his 
ex-wife’s house. At some point, his ex-wife vacated the house, but he indicated that she 
would come and go as she pleased. He attempted to make arrangements with his ex-
wife for him to obtain sole ownership of the house. However, they could not reach an 
agreement. He eventually hired an attorney and brought a legal action seeking to 
modify the marital settlement agreement so that he would obtain sole ownership of the 
house. A letter from the attorney indicated that, while Applicant was residing in the 
house with his current wife, his ex-wife continued to enter the property. She reportedly 
left doors or windows open, changed temperature settings, and dumped potted plants 
on the carpet. In this legal proceeding, the court ruled against making any changes to 
the ownership of the house. The court order stated that Applicant was to have exclusive 
use and possession of the master bedroom in the house, while his ex-wife was to have 
exclusive use and possession of the other bedroom. During the proceeding, Applicant 
also learned that his ex-wife obtained a third mortgage on the house in October 2007.15  
                                                          
12 Tr. 89-91, 94-96, 129-139; GE 4; AE M, P. The power of attorney also authorized his ex-wife to 
encumber the title to the property. 
13 Tr. 59, 89-91; AE D. 
14 Tr. 60-62, 91-92, 94, 126-139. 
15 Tr. 62-64, 92-99, 114-115, 126-139; AE L, M, P, Q. Around the time Applicant’s ex-wife 
obtained the third mortgage, she also purchased three condominiums near the house. She apparently 
resided at least part-time in one of those condominiums. 
 
 
6 
 
The third mortgage was for $90,330. This mortgage was in Applicant’s and his 
ex-wife’s names. She signed his name to the mortgage as “attorney in fact” using the 
power of attorney. At the hearing, he testified that he did not authorize her to obtain this 
mortgage and that he received no funds from this mortgage. He also testified that, 
before the third mortgage was obtained, the value of the home exceeded the amount 
owed on the first two mortgages. While after the execution of third mortgage, the 
amount owed on the three mortgages exceeded the value of the home. The third 
mortgage does not appear on any of Applicant’s credit reports. There is no evidence in 
record that the third mortgage is delinquent.16 
 
Applicant indicated that his ex-wife stated she would sign over the house to him if 
he took sole responsibility for the three mortgages and paid her an additional $50,000 or 
$60,000. He discussed with his attorney the available options for resolving this situation, 
including a short sale. His ex-wife agreed to pursue a short sale, but the first mortgage 
holder would not approve the sale. Based on the advice of his attorney, Applicant 
elected to allow the house to go into foreclosure. The attorney advised him that the 
equity in the house would most likely satisfy the first mortgage, that the second 
mortgage holder may come after him for any deficiency on that note, and that he was 
not legally responsible for the third mortgage. Before defaulting on the mortgages, he 
informed his security officer of this intention to let his house go into foreclosure. He also 
called the first and second mortgage holders to advise them that he decided to let the 
house go into foreclosure. He advised the second mortgage holder that he thought it 
would receive some money during the foreclosure proceeding. After that conversation, 
he did not contact the second mortgage holder during the foreclosure process, but a 
collection agency did contact him about the second mortgage. Based on his 
conversation with the collection agency, he thought that he would be contacted after the 
foreclosure if there was a deficiency. The collection agency never contacted him about 
any deficiency.17  
 
Applicant stopped making mortgage payments on the house in July 2008. During 
an interview with an Office of Personnel Management investigator in September 2009, 
Applicant reportedly stated that he had “no intention [of] paying the home.” A Final 
Judgment of Mortgage Foreclosure was entered against Applicant on October 20, 2009. 
The judgment indicated that he owed $129,574 on the first mortgage, which included 
unpaid principal ($112,663), interest ($11,303), and various fees ($5,608). On 
December 2, 2009, the first mortgage holder purchased the house for $100 at a 
                                                          
16 Tr. 62-66, 101-102, 115-117, 126-139; AE L, M, P, Q, R, CC, DD, EE, FF. Applicant contends 
that his ex-wife exceeded the authority he granted her in the power of attorney when she executed the 
third mortgage and that he was not bound by the third mortgage. Because the third mortgage is not 
considered a delinquent debt, the issue of whether he is financially responsible for the third mortgage is 
not important in this proceeding. Here, the third mortgage is relevant because it encumbered the property 
and limited his and his ex-wife’s ability to sell the house.  
17 Tr. 64-69, 73, 113-115; GE 1, 4; AE Q, Z, AA, BB. In his security clearance application, 
Applicant stated, “This was a voluntary foreclosure based upon a house owned between former spouse 
and myself and at the advice of my legal counsel to clean up unresolved activities from former divorce 
decree.”  
 
7 
 
foreclosure sale. County property records indicate the house sold again for $139,200 on 
August 31, 2010. Applicant’s latest combined credit report dated March 20, 2012, 
reflected one credit reporting agency listed the first mortgage as “paid or paying as 
agreed,” while another stated “foreclosure redeemed.” Two credit reporting agencies 
listed the balance owed on the first mortgage as “zero,” while the third credit agency 
merely left the space for the balance blank. The first mortgage was satisfied in the 
foreclosure.18 
 
After receipt of the SOR, Applicant contacted the collection agency in an attempt 
to resolve the second mortgage. They discussed possible settlement options. The 
collection agency advised him that it had to coordinate with the second mortgage holder 
before agreeing to any settlement option. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant 
indicated that he again contacted the collection agency but “has received no information 
from either [the second mortgage holder or the collection agency] regarding the total 
amount allegedly to be owed on the HELOC note, or possible payment options.” He 
intends to resolve the second mortgage. I found Applicant to be credible witness.19 
 
Applicant’s current wife does not work. He currently earns about $115,000 per 
year in salary and also receives half of his military retirement. In 2008, he purchased 
another home before the foreclosure occurred. His most recent credit report reflected 
that he has a real estate mortgage for $303,440. This mortgage is current and, 
according to its payment history, he has never missed a payment. The credit report also 
reflected that his only delinquent debt is the second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b) that is listed 
as charged off with a balance of $78,140. On November 24, 2010, he submitted a 
personal financial statement that reflected his net monthly income was $9,107, that his 
total monthly expenses were $2,100, and that his monthly debt payments were $3,542, 
which left him a net monthly remainder of $3,464. His monthly debt payments included 
a mortgage payment of $1,772. At the hearing, he testified that his net monthly 
remainder was then about $1,500 or $2,000. He also testified that he was never 
delinquent on his alimony payments or his former child support payments.20 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant has been awarded the Air Force Achievement Medal, Joint Service 
Achievement Medal, Joint Service Commendation Medal, Air Force Commendation 
Medal, Aerial Achievement Medal (5 awards), Air Medal, Meritorious Service Medal, 
Good Conduct Medal (7 awards) and various other awards. He has served in combat 
zones during Desert Storm and in military operations involving Panama and Kosovo.21  
                                                          
18 Tr. 63-69, 99-104, 119-126; GE 1, 2, 3, 4; GE 4; AE C, M, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y. At the 
hearing, a discussion occurred about whether Applicant’s exhibits established that the first mortgage was 
resolved during the foreclosure proceeding. His post-hearing exhibits, particularly AE R, establish that the 
first mortgage has been resolved.  
19 Tr. 63-69, 104-106; AE M, O. 
20 Tr. 69-74, 77-81, 106-112; GE 2, 3, 4, 5; AE R.  
21 Tr. 46-47; AE N. 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s program manager recommended him for a security clearance. He has 
known Applicant for about eight years and stated he has no reservations about his 
character or loyalty.22 
 
Kyrgyzstan23  
 
 Kyrgyzstan is a small, poor Central Asian country that gained its independence 
after the dissolution of the former Soviet Union. It is a constitutional republic with a 
President and Prime Minister. About 90% of the country is mountainous. It maintains 
close ties to other former soviet countries, particularly Kazakhstan and Russia.  
 
 Kyrgyzstan has been subject to political turbulence and ethnic unrest. In late 
2010, it had three reported terrorist attacks or attempted terrorist attacks. In one of 
those attacks, a bomb exploded outside a sports venue and two police officers suffered 
minor injuries. Human rights concerns exist in Kyrgyzstan. These concerns include 
reports of arbitrary killings and arrests, torture, abuse by law enforcement officials, lack 
of judicial independence, pervasive corruption, and discrimination against women and 
other minorities. 
 
 Since 2001, Kyrgyzstan has hosted the Manas Air Base, an important logistical 
hub for the Coalition efforts in Afghanistan. In mid-2009, Kyrgyzstan threatened to close 
the base, but kept it open after the United States agreed to a higher lease and other 
financial inducements.  
 
United Arab Emirates24 
 
The UAE is a federation of emirates, each with its own ruler. The federal 
government is a constitutional republic, headed by a president and council of ministries. 
Traditional rule in the UAE is generally patriarchal with political allegiance defined in 
terms of loyalty to tribal leaders. There are no democratically elected legislative 
institutions or political parties, and no general elections. Only 15-20% of UAE’s 
population is composed of UAE citizens. The remaining population includes significant 
numbers of other Arabs, including many Iranians. The government of UAE has 
expressed fears that the large Iranian-origin community in the Dubai emirate could pose 
a threat to UAE stability. 
 
There are problems in the UAE with regard to human rights, including, arbitrary 
arrests and indefinite incommunicado detentions, government restriction on civil 
liberties, and a lack of judicial independence, political organizations, and political 
parties. Domestic abuse of women remains a common problem. Labor unions are illegal 
and private associations must follow censorship guidelines and receive governmental 
                                                          
22 AE H. 
23 Tr. 49; HE 2; AE I, K. 
24 HE 3; AE J, K. 
 
9 
 
approval before anything is published. The UAE does not recognize dual nationality, 
and UAE authorities have confiscated U.S. passports of dual nationals. 
 
The United States and the UAE have had friendly relations since 1971. The UAE 
contributes to the continued security of the Persian Gulf, and is a partner against 
terrorism. However, the UAE is one of only three countries that recognized the Taliban 
as the legitimate government of Afghanistan and two of the September 11, 2001, 
hijackers were from the UAE. In 2009, UAE security officials were credited with breaking 
up an al Qaeda plot to blow up targets in the Dubai emirate. Additionally, issues of 
UAE’s cooperation with terrorism and proliferation remain a concern because of UAE’s 
lax pattern of enforcement of export and border controls, particularly with respect to 
leakage of U.S. or other technology to Iran. There have also been cases of illegal 
export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to the UAE, 
including products with potential nuclear and military applications. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
10 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three potentially applicable conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;   
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 
11 
 
Applicant’s wife is now a citizen and resident of the United States. SOR ¶ 2.a is 
no longer an accurate statement. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk inherent in having a 
family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign 
country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”25 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”26 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerability to coercion from the government, terrorist organizations, or 
other groups.27 
 
 Applicant has family members in Kyrgyzstan and UAE. His mother-in-law is a 
citizen of Kyrgyzstan and part-time resident of both Kyrgyzstan and UAE. His sister-in-
law is a citizen of Kyrgyzstan and resident of UAE. Kyrgyzstan and UAE continue to 
have human rights issues and have been victimized by terrorist. This creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
His family contacts in Kyrgyzstan and UAE also create a potential conflict of interest 
with his obligation to protect sensitive information. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Two are potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
                                                          
25 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
26 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
27 See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided.) 
 
12 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
No evidence has been presented to show that Applicant’s relatives in Kyrgyzstan 
and UAE work for any governmental entities. Nevertheless, those countries have 
continuing human rights concerns. Because of the nature of those governments and the 
terrorist concerns, I am unable to find that AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
Applicant was born in the United States. He served on active duty in the USAF 
for about 25 years. During all of his adult life, he has either served in the military or 
worked for defense contractors. He has served in combat zones. He has never traveled 
to either Kyrgyzstan or the UAE. He and his wife own no property outside the United 
States. His wife has submitted paperwork for her mother to immigrate to the United 
States. His has had limited contact with his mother-in-law and sister-in-law. As of July 
2011, he had not yet met his mother-in-law or sister-in-law in person. Based on 
Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, he 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest or security issue in favor of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable to Applicant’s foreign contacts.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had two mortgages totaling about $190,000 on which he defaulted. 
One of those mortgages totaling about $78,000 remains unresolved. He has been 
 
13 
 
unable or unwilling to satisfy that unresolved mortgage for a couple of years. This 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  There are five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife owned a home together for a number of years. After he 
married his current wife, he attempted to obtain sole ownership of the home. He and his 
ex-wife were unable to reach an agreement regarding the home. He brought a legal 
action to obtain sole ownership of the home, but the court ruled against him on that 
issue. During that legal proceeding, Applicant learned his ex-wife had obtained a third 
mortgage on the home. Because of the third mortgage, selling the home was not a 
viable option. After consulting with an attorney, he elected to default on the two alleged 
mortgages. He stopped paying the mortgages in July 2008. The first mortgage holder 
purchased the home at a foreclosure sale.  The first mortgage was satisfied during a 
subsequent sale of the home. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply to SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 During these events, Applicant has been continuously employed. His default on 
the mortgages was a voluntary decision he made to get himself out of an untenable 
situation. He could have continued to make payments on the first and second mortgage. 
As a practical matter, however, he could not live in the house with his current wife when 
his ex-wife would come and go as she pleased and would harass them. Because of the 
three mortgages, he could not sell the house without incurring a significant loss. He was 
boxed into a corner. He followed the advice of his attorney to let the house go into 
foreclosure. This decision was not purely a financial decision to get out from underneath 
the mortgages, but was driven by his desire to resolve a problematic domestic situation. 
 
14 
 
 
 Before defaulting on these mortgages, Applicant contacted the second mortgage 
holder to told them that he would let the home go into foreclosure. After talking with a 
collection agency, he thought that he would be advised after the foreclosure if there was 
a deficiency on the second mortgage. The first mortgage was resolved during a 
subsequent sale of the property in August 2010. It is not known whether the second 
mortgage holder received any proceeds from that sale. Applicant was never contacted 
about a deficiency. When he received the SOR, he initially thought that he had no 
obligation to repay the second mortgage because it was charged off. He now realizes 
the security concerns that arise from the defaulted second mortgage. Since receipt of 
the SOR, he contacted the collection agency to discuss ways to resolve this debt. The 
collection agency is coordinating with the second mortgage holder about resolution 
options. Applicant is still waiting to hear from the collection agency and indicated that he 
intends to resolve this debt.   
 
 In hindsight, Applicant should have revoked the power of attorney and resolved 
the issue concerning the ownership of the house before marrying his current wife. On 
the other hand, he could not have reasonably foreseen the actions that his ex-wife was 
going to take, particularly her execution of the third mortgage and her harassment of 
him and his current wife. His ex-wife’s conduct created a situation that was beyond his 
control. The default on the second mortgage occurred under unusual circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur and that do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. The second mortgage is the only delinquent debt 
listed on his most recent credit report. He has a history of meeting his financial 
obligations. Since learning of the security significance of this delinquent debt, he has 
initiated steps to resolve it. Based on his testimony, I am convinced he is committed to 
resolving this delinquent debt. AG ¶ 20(a) applies to SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies. The remaining mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
15 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
During all of his adult life, Applicant has served in the military or worked for 
defense contractors. He has held a security clearance for many years without incident. 
While his mother-in-law and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of foreign countries, 
he has relatively little contact with them. Whatever potential conflicts may arise from him 
having family members in Kyrgyzstan and UAE are more than counterbalanced by his 
interests, responsibilities, and loyalties in the United States. He mitigated the Foreign 
Influence security concerns. 
 
Applicant defaulted on two mortgages. These defaults occurred under unusual 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. The defaults are an isolated event. The first 
mortgage was resolved during the foreclosure proceeding. After the foreclosure, he 
initially did not appreciate the security significance of the delinquent second mortgage. 
Since receiving the SOR, he has initiated action to resolve the second mortgage. He is 
currently waiting to hear from the collection agency about possible options for resolving 
this debt. He is committed to resolving it. The underlying circumstances surrounding the 
defaulted mortgages do not persuade me that Applicant is currently an unreliable 
person who is unsuitable for a security clearance. Considering his long history of 
service to our country, he should be given the opportunity to resolve this debt while 
holding a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.c:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
