 
1 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07461 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In March 2010, Applicant was arrested and later convicted of driving under the 
influence (DUI) of alcohol. Also in 2010, he knowingly broke the law by driving on a 
revoked or suspended license. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security 
concerns under the personal conduct, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct 
guidelines. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 13, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Guideline E, personal conduct; Guideline G, alcohol consumption; and Guideline J, 
criminal conduct. 
 
 On January 23, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
March 15, 2012, I was assigned the case. On April 10, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on April 26, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 35, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. On May 4, 2012, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted some of the factual allegations in 
the SOR and denied the remainder. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old general engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since April 2004, and seeks to maintain a security clearance. From March 
1974 to March 1978, he served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force. (Ex. 14) He left the 
service as an E-4. While working for a DoD contractor, he deployed to Iraq three times 
for 90-day periods in 2004, 2005, and 2006. In 2007, he deployed to Afghanistan for 90 
days. (Ex. 20) Applicant is past president of his American Legion Post.  
 
Applicant’s supervisor states Applicant is a reliable, well respected employee 
willing to “go to the ends of the earth to support our mission.” (Ex. C) Applicant is also a 
dedicated husband, father, and patriot. (Ex. C) A co-worker states, Applicant is honest, 
open, and can be counted on to do the job. His work is of the highest caliber. (Ex. D)  
 
 Between 1974 and March 2010, Applicant was arrested numerous times on a 
variety of charges. In March 2010, he was arrested and pleaded guilty to Operating a 
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (Alcohol) (OMVUII).  
 
 In February 1974, Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana.2 The 
charge was later dropped. In October 1976, he was arrested and found guilty of Driving 
Under the Influence (DUI). He paid a $400 fine and was placed on probation for six 
months. In December 1977 and February 1978, he was arrested and convicted of 
Contempt of Court/Driving While Suspended. In January 1983, he was again arrested 
for Contempt of Court. In 1980, 1983, and 1986, he was arrested for failing to pay child 
support. (Ex. 2, 3, 4, 22, 23) In July 1987, he was arrested and charged with Telephone 
Harassment/Threat. (Ex. 4, 11) The charge was dropped. In June 1988, January 1991, 
July 1991, August 1993, March 1997, and July 1999, he was arrested and charged with 
                                                          
2
 In January 1977, Applicant – then 19 years old – was a passenger in a car stopped by police. A search 
of the vehicle discovered a plastic bag containing marijuana under the passenger’s seat. (Exs. 2, 5, 13) 
The charge was later dropped.  
 
3 
 
 
 
Assault/Family Violence. (Exs. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 24, 26, 31) The charges were dropped 
or dismissed. (Ex. 24, 27)  
 
 On Mother’s Day in May 2003, Applicant was arrested for aggravated assault 
with a deadly weapon. In July 2007, the charges were dismissed. (Ex. 4) Applicant’s 
step-son hit him twice on the head with a billy club. (Ex. 28) Applicant then hit his step-
son with a billy club. The Assistant District Attorney found Applicant had acted after 
being attacked and the charges were dismissed. (Ex. 18, 29)  
 
 In 1974, Applicant was granted a secret clearance. In December 1994, he 
completed a National Agency Questionnaire (NAQ). (Ex. 6) On December 14, 2007, 
Applicant was issued an SOR for security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, 
and Guideline E, personal conduct. (Ex. 17) On March 26, 2008, a hearing was held 
before a DOHA administrative judge (AJ). (Ex. 19) The criminal conduct concern was 
mitigated because five years had passed since Applicant’s May 2003 arrest. (Ex. 20) 
Additional favorable information included: his current domestic situation was stable, his 
favorable performance reviews, overseas deployments, and his position as commander 
of his American Legion Post. The personal conduct concerns were also mitigated due to 
the passage of time and because the government had granted Applicant access to 
classified information despite his failure to list all of his arrests and despite his 2006 
admission he had not listed his 1973-1974 marijuana usage. (Ex. 20) The facts found in 
that decision are relied upon and adopted as accurate and relevant. 
 
 In the early morning of New Year’s Day, January 1, 2010, a heated argument got 
out of control resulting in an altercation with his wife’s son. (Ex. 31) Applicant asserts he 
was sober. However, the police incident report states all “subjects were intoxicated, and 
uncooperative.” (Ex. 31) 
 On St. Patrick’s Day 2010, Applicant was drinking at an Irish pub from 7 p.m. 
until 1 a.m. On March 18, 2010, he was stopped for speeding and arrested for OVUII, 
which makes it a crime under state law to operate a motor vehicle with blood alcohol 
content–concentration (BAC) equal to or above 0.08%. (Ex. 32) At the time of his 
arrest his BAC was 0.16. (Ex. 32) He pleaded guilty to the offense. (Ex. 33) His 
driver’s license was suspended for 180 days; he paid a $604 fine, and completed a 12-
hour DUI awareness course in May 2011. (Ex. B) At various times during 2010, he 
knowingly drove while his license was revoked or suspended. (Ex. 35)  
In April 2011, Applicant underwent a clinical alcohol assessment, which included 
a clinical interview, and administration of three alcohol screening instruments including 
the Michigan Alcohol Screening Test (MAST), the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification 
Test, and the Texas Christian University Alcohol-Drug Screen 2. (Ex. 34) The results of 
the screening tests were below the cutoff points which would indicate a current 
substance abuse problem. There was no indication the evaluator knew Applicant’s 
history of alcohol use and abuse. The assessment states Applicant “had a singular 
misadventure as opposed to being a frequent drinking driver.” (Ex. 34) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations 
 Between 1974 and March 2010, Applicant was involved in numerous arrests and 
violations of the law. Many of these arrests are not recent. However, in March 2010, 
approximately two years ago, Applicant operated a vehicle while under the influence of 
an intoxicant. His BAC was .16%. He pleaded guilty to the offense. Approximately two 
months earlier, he was involved in an altercation with his wife’s son. He denies being 
intoxicated at the time, but the police report states all individuals were intoxicated and 
uncooperative.  
 
 In 2010, Applicant knowing broke the law by driving on a revoked or suspended 
license. He should know the seriousness of such actions because in December 1977 
and February 1978, his similar conduct resulted in his arrest, conviction, fine, and one 
year of probation.  
 
6 
 
 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
conduct during 2010 did not involve minor offenses. He was arrested on St. Patrick’s 
Day for drunk driving. On a different occasion, the police went to his residence on a 
domestic matter. He drove even though he knew his driver’s license was suspended or 
revoked. I conclude that his offenses were not “minor” within the meaning of this 
guideline. Additionally, due to the number of similar incidents, these events did not 
occur under unique circumstances.  
 
 The key question is whether his conduct is mitigated by the passage of time. 
There are no bright line rules for determining when conduct has been mitigated by the 
passage of time. The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality 
of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the 
evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,“ then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.” Id. Applicant’s last misconduct was in March 2010, just over 
two years ago. This arrest occurred after being evaluated for a security clearance for 
similar conduct. He had been granted a clearance two years before his most recent 
arrest. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur” AG ¶ 17(d). An April 2011 assessment by the Division of 
Driver Education states the screening tests did not indicate a current substance abuse 
problem. The credentials of the individual making this statement were not provided. In 
the January 2010 altercation, Applicant states he was not intoxicated, which contradicts 
the police report.  
 
 Applicant has not acknowledged some of his inappropriate behavior. Considering 
the numerous assault and family violence incidents, I am not satisfied that his behavior 
is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
 Those allegations alleged to have occurred prior Applicant’s 2007 hearing are 
found for him. However, the alcohol and family violence assault arrests and other 
incidents are considered in evaluating the allegations which occurred after Applicant’s 
2007 hearing. Specifically, they are considered in evaluating Applicant’s March 2010 
DUI, the January 2010 altercation with his wife’s son, and his driving on a revoked or 
suspended license.  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
 
7 
 
 
 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. In October 1967, he was arrested for DUI and later 
convicted. In March 2010, more than 40 years later, he was again arrested and later 
convicted of DUI. At the time of his most recent arrest his BAC was .16%, twice the 
legal limit. AG ¶ 22 (a) “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent,” and AG ¶ 22 (c) “habitual or binge consumption of 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” apply.  
 
None of the mitigating factors listed in AG ¶ 23 apply. Applicant’s last DUI arrest 
was approximately two years ago, and his first DUI arrest more than 40 years ago. He 
had a number of alcohol-related arrests between those dates. It is too early to predict 
Applicant’s alcohol problem is a thing of the past. AG ¶ 23(a) “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” does not apply because his 
alcohol-related incidents involving the police and courts are recent, are not infrequent, 
nor did they happen under unusual circumstances. 
 
An April 2011 assessment by the Division of Driver Education stated the 
screening tests did not indicate a current substance abuse problem. Applicant had a 
clinical interview and was administered three alcohol-screening tests. However, there is 
no indication that the evaluator knew of Applicant’s history of alcohol use and abuse for 
he stated Applicant had a single misadventure. I find AG ¶ 23(d) “the individual has 
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with 
any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has 
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program,” 
does not apply. He presented no documents related to his attendance or completion of 
any alcohol-related counseling or treatment. He has not received a reliable favorable 
prognosis by a qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s personal conduct as criminal conduct listing 
the majority of the SOR allegations previously listed under personal conduct. The 
concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
 Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include “a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
 
8 
 
 
 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and (c) apply. Applicant has had numerous arrests including a drunken driving 
arrest after his DOHA hearing in 2007 that had reviewed similar conduct.  
 
 In AG ¶ 32(a), security concerns raised by criminal conduct may be mitigated by 
evidence that “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 
32(d), a security concerns also may be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
 Applicant’s last arrest was approximately two years ago and thereafter, he drove 
while his license was suspended or revoked. These are relatively recent events and not 
in the distant past. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. He has demonstrated his loyalty, 
patriotism, and trustworthiness through his service to the DoD as a contractor. He has 
served in combat zones in Iraq and Afghanistan as a contractor. He has risked his life to 
support DoD missions in those countries. He is also a past commander of his American 
Legion Post.  
 
In 2007, the majority of the current SOR allegations were reviewed. At that 
hearing the criminal conduct and personal conduct was found to be mitigated and 
Applicant was granted a clearance. Following the hearing, Applicant was arrested and 
convicted of DUI and drove while his license was revoked or suspended. The DUI arrest 
 
9 
 
 
 
occurred approximately two years ago and his driving while on a revoked or suspended 
license were more recent. It is simply too soon to reinstate Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
worthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:  For Applicant     
  Subparagraphs 1.v and 1.w: Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Alcohol Consumption:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Criminal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
