 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-07899 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He currently 
owes about $20,000 in delinquent debt to several creditors. Although his financial 
trouble was due to a period of unemployment and divorce, he has been with his current 
employer for over two years and failed to establish that his financial situation is under 
control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 29, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations).1 On March 14, 2012, Applicant submitted his Answer to 
the SOR and, in an e-mail dated March 26, 2012, requested a decision on the 
administrative record. 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On April 17, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the File of Relevant Material 
(FORM).2 Applicant received the FORM on April 30, 2012. He had 30 days within which 
to file a response and any objections to the FORM. He did not submit a response or 
objections. I was assigned the case on June 21, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his early fifties. He divorced in 2010 after twenty-plus years of 
marriage. He has two teenage children from his marriage. One of his children lives with 
him and the other lives with his ex-wife. (GE 3; GE 6) 
 
 Applicant has been awarded several graduate degrees from prestigious 
institutions, to include:  a master’s degree in public affairs, a juris doctorate, and a 
master’s of law degree. He worked as an attorney in private practice until 2001, when 
he accepted an in-house counsel position with a federal contractor. He voluntarily 
resigned the in-house counsel position in 2008 to accept a job with another federal 
contractor, but the job offer fell through. He was unemployed for a year and, at the 
same time, went through divorce proceedings. His bank accounts were frozen by the 
divorce court and he was forced to rely on his savings to pay his ever-mounting 
expenses, which now included maintaining two households. He was able to secure part-
time employment as a sale associate at a large retail store in the fall of 2009, but it was 
at a fraction of his prior salary. He was hired by his current employer in December 2009. 
(GE 3; GE 4; GE 6) 
 
Applicant was granted a security clearance in 2001. He submitted a recent 
security clearance application in June 2010, wherein he voluntarily disclosed the 
financial difficulty that he was going through due to his recent divorce and period of 
unemployment. (GE 3) He also discussed his financial situation during his background 
interview and in response to DOHA interrogatories. He freely disclosed that he had 
fallen behind on his mortgage and the home was in foreclosure, but that he was actively 
working with the lender on a modification. Applicant also noted the he had fallen behind 
on his rent to his former landlord for the condominium he rented after separating from 
his wife, but had worked out a payment arrangement with his former landlord. (GE 6; 
Answer) He did not submit documentary proof of his efforts to resolve his delinquent 
mortgage or past-due rent.  
 
Applicant’s expenses exceeded his income by about $1,400 from December 
2009 to July 2011, when he moved out of the condo. Since moving out of the condo, 
Applicant claims he slashed his living expenses and has not incurred any further bad 
debt. (GE 6; Answer) He did not submit proof that he has taken a financial counseling 
course or other evidence of the steps he has taken to put his financial house in order.  
 
                                                          
2
 The FORM contains the Government’s position and nine documentary exhibits. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 are admitted into the record without objection.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant admits that he currently owes 20 different creditors about $21,589 in 
delinquent debt. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.t) Eight of these debts are medical collection accounts 
totaling $1,850. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b, 1.d – 1.i) The remaining twelve debts, totaling 
$19,739, consist of Applicant’s delinquent mortgage, past-due rent for his old condo, 
delinquent credit cards, and other past-due accounts. Applicant further admits that 
these delinquent debts remain unresolved, but that he now lives within his means and is 
committed to resolving his delinquent debts in the near future.3 (See Answer)  
 
Applicant summarizes his position for why he should be granted a clearance as 
follows: 
 
Although I’m not proud that I got myself into this mess, I don’t hide from it 
and it’s not a secret or a source of blackmail or anything like that. I think 
people are generally aware that I don’t have the money I used to have 
because of hard times in my life. I did, however, take good care of my kids 
and gave them as stable an environment as I could . . . and I am very 
proud of that. I am fiercely loyal to my employer, who gave me a job and a 
chance to get back on my feet when both of those were hard to come by. I 
am a proud American, and no one has any basis to question my loyalty, 
nor do I fear that anyone could force me to act contrary to the interests of 
my employer or my country. (GE 6, Narrative) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
                                                          
3
 Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.u, a purported $31 delinquency on a music club account that is only 
referenced in one, old credit report submitted by the Government. Such insignificant debt does not raise a 
security concern on its own or when considered in examining the totality Applicant’s financial situation. 
Further, in light of the ultimate resolution of this case, I find in Applicant’s favor as to this debt. 
 
 
4 
 
 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.4 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
                                                          
4
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
5
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
5 
 
 
“This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of his or her 
debts.”6 The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, which may indicate 
that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in 
handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of nearly $20,000 in non-medical, delinquent debt 
touches on this concern. It also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under 
AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Further, Applicant admitted that he lived beyond his means from December 2009 
to July 2011, which raises AG ¶ 19 (e), to wit: “consistent spending beyond one’s 
means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” (emphasis added) 
 
 Applicant may mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one 
or more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating 
conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
                                                          
6
 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 
(App. Bd. June 26, 2012) (The Guideline F concern “is broader than a concern that an applicant might 
commit criminal acts in order to pay off his debts. Rather, Guideline F requires a judge to consider the 
totality of an applicant’s circumstances–the reasons underlying his financial problems and his efforts to 
address them–in order to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the applicant possesses the judgment and 
self-control required of those who have access to national security information.”) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial situation was due to his recent unemployment and divorce. 
However, he has been gainfully employed since December 2009 and failed to submit 
proof that he has resolved or is resolving the debts he accumulated during his period of 
financial distress. An applicant is not required to be debt-free or required to pay off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously to demonstrate that they have the requisite 
judgment and reliability expected of those granted access to classified information. 
Instead, an applicant must demonstrate that, given his or her circumstances, they have 
developed a reasonable plan to resolve their financial issues and submit documentary 
proof of their actions to effectuate the plan.7 Applicant has failed to do so. He admits 
that the debts he amassed during his period of financial turmoil remain unresolved and 
failed to submit documentary proof of the efforts he has made to put his financial house 
in order. Thus, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part, but none of the other mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant failed to mitigate the concern raised by his finances. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I considered the favorable and extenuating factors in 
this case, including Applicant’s honesty during the security clearance process, his 
impressive academic and work accomplishments, and his devotion to his children. 
However, he has a substantial amount of unresolved debt and failed to dispel the 
significant security concerns raised by his financial situation.9 The favorable whole-
person factors present in this case do not outweigh these concerns. Hopefully, 
Applicant will be able to address his financial situation and provide proof of a track 
record of fiscally responsible conduct in order to re-establish his security worthiness in 
due course. However, at this time, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
                                                          
7
 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). See also ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 
(App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present documentation to substantiate his or her 
claim about the debts at issue). 
 
8
 The adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9
 See generally ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (an applicant’s honesty 
and “[e]ven years of safeguarding national security information may not be sufficient to mitigate a history 
of ongoing, significant delinquent debt.”). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
