1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-11020
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq.  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance. He is unable to mitigate the foreign influence security concern
stemming from his family ties to Afghanistan. Likewise, he is unable to mitigate the
personal conduct concern stemming from his high-risk sexual behavior, which
demonstrates poor judgment, while working for a defense contractor in support of the
U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7 (Department Counsel must request a hearing within 20 days of receipt of2
an applicant’s answer to the SOR). 
 Tr. 9–10. 3
 Appellate Exhibits I and II; Tr. 17–19.   4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on or about1
October 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.
The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the
security guidelines known as Guideline B for foreign influence, Guideline E for personal
conduct, and Guideline F for financial considerations.    
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.
In turn, Department Counsel timely requested a hearing,  and Applicant confirmed that2
he had no objection to a hearing.  The hearing took place May 1, 2012. The transcript3
(Tr.) was received May 17, 2012.  
Procedural Matters
Without objections, I took administrative or official notice of certain facts
concerning the country of Afghanistan per Department Counsel’s written requests.  The4
essential facts are set forth below. 
Findings of Fact
The gravamen of the SOR is as follows: (1) under Guideline B, Applicant is
subject to a foreign influence security concern because of his family ties to Afghanistan;
(2) under Guideline E, Applicant is subject to a personal conduct concern due to (a)
falsification of answers to questions on security clearance applications submitted in
2005 and 2009, and (b) high-risk sexual behavior during 2002–2008, most of which took
place while working for a defense contractor in support of the U.S. armed forces; and
(3) under Guideline F, Applicant is subject to a financial considerations concern due to a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which was filed in 2003 and discharged in 2004. His answer
to the SOR was mixed with admissions, denials, and brief explanations. His admissions
 Exhibit A. 5
 Tr. 68–69. 6
3
are accepted and adopted and incorporated herein as findings of fact. In addition, the
following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of the federal government. He is seeking to
obtain an industrial security clearance to work as a Pashto linguist for a defense
contractor, which is sponsoring his security clearance application. His educational
background includes a bachelor’s degree awarded in 1992 from a university in
Afghanistan and attendance at U.S. colleges. His recent employment history includes
the following: (1) a retail store owner–operator during 2002–2004, which ended in the
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case; (2) a Pashto linguist for a defense contractor during
2004–2005; and (3) an assistant professor of Pashto for the federal government from
August 2005 to present.
Applicant is a native of Afghanistan. He emigrated from Pakistan in 1993,
entering the United States as a refugee. Seven years later in 2000, he obtained U.S.
citizenship through the naturalization process. He married in 2005, and the couple have
two young children, both of whom are native-born U.S. citizens. His spouse is also a
native of Afghanistan, she is a permanent resident alien of the United States, and she
has applied to become a naturalized U.S. citizen.   5
In addition to his wife and children, Applicant’s immediate family no longer live in
Afghanistan. His mother, four brothers, and a sister are U.S. citizens who reside in the
United States. His father, who served as high-ranking officer in the Afghan Army, was
also a U.S. citizen before he recently passed away. 
Applicant’s spouse has multiple family members living in Afghanistan. Her
mother, father, and ten siblings are citizens of and residents in Afghanistan. She
maintains regular contact (as frequently as weekly) with her family members. Applicant
is not well acquainted with his in-laws, whom he describes as rural people and farmers
who have no direct connection to the Afghan government or military. 
In the past, Applicant had contact (once every three to four months) with a
cousin, who is also his wife’s brother.  That contact has decreased in recent years, and6
Applicant feels no sense of obligation toward this individual. 
Applicant sends money to Afghanistan once a year as a charitable act required
by his religious faith. He previously sent the money to a cousin, but now sends the
annual contribution to his father-in-law. All of Applicant’s financial interests are in the
United States. He has no financial interests in Afghanistan or any other foreign country.
Besides the 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, there is no other evidence of financial
problems, and his current financial situation appears to be stable. 
 Exhibits 1 and 2. 7
 Exhibit 6. 8
4
Applicant completed and submitted security clearance applications in August
2005 and November 2009.  In doing so, he was required to answer a variety of7
questions about his background. In his 2005 application, he did not disclose his Chapter
7 bankruptcy case, which was discharged in 2004, in response to a question asking if
he had filed a bankruptcy petition in the last seven years. In his 2009 application, he did
not disclose two cousins in Afghanistan (alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g) in response to
a question asking about maintaining foreign contacts. He disclosed the Chapter 7
bankruptcy case in the 2009 application. He acknowledges the correct answer to both
questions was “yes” and maintains that he did not fully understand the questions.
Applicant expounded upon his explanation at the hearing, and his explanation is
accepted as credible. In making this credibility finding, I note that English is not
Applicant’s native language and I have given him some leeway in this regard.  
In 2008, Applicant was going through pre-employment screening with an agency
of the federal government. During that process, Applicant disclosed the high-risk sexual
behavior that forms the basis for those allegations under Guideline E. He also
acknowledged his conduct in response to interrogatories from DOHA.  Those matters8
are summarized or condensed as follows: 
• In 2002 while traveling in Mexico, Applicant went to a nightclub where a stripper
propositioned him. He went to a private room with the woman, but decided not to
engage in sexual intercourse with her. He nevertheless paid her $50 for her time.
• On three occasions in 2004, Applicant engaged the services of Afghan
prostitutes. He did so while employed for a defense contractor in support of the
U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan. 
• In 2004 and 2008, Applicant called massage parlors and solicited sexual services
by asking what “something extra” would cost. The 2008 solicitation took place
when he was going through pre-employment screening with an agency of the
federal government. He denies any intent to obtain sexual services in 2008,
claiming he was bored and decided to call and inquire.   
Concerning Applicant’s country of birth, after the 1979 invasion and subsequent
withdrawal of the then Soviet Union, Afghanistan experienced a civil war among several
factions, including the Taliban. By the end 1998, the Taliban controlled most of
Afghanistan and provided sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, al-Qaida, and other terrorists
groups. U.S. military forces, along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced the
Taliban from power by November 2001. With U.S. assistance and support, a new
democratic government took office in 2004, which continues to this day. In spite of
efforts by the United States and the Afghan government, Afghanistan continues to be a
violent, unsafe, and unstable country that is subject to terrorists attacks and suicide
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a9
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 17
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).18
5
bombings. Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor, due to the continuing
insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from years of war. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As9
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt10
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An11
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  12
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting13
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An14
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate15
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme16
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.17
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.18
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.19
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 20
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant21
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  22
6
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it19
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
In analyzing this case, I will address the three guidelines in the reverse order in
which they were alleged, starting with the financial considerations guideline.
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant20
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline21
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  22
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties as shown by the 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. The evidence
 AG ¶ 19(a).  23
 AG ¶ 19(c). 24
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b). 25
 AG ¶¶ 15–17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 26
 AG ¶ 15. 27
 AG ¶ 16(e). 28
7
also raises a security concern because it indicates an inability to satisfy debts  and a23
history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F.24
Nevertheless, the concern is mitigated because it was caused by a business failure,
there is no evidence of similar conduct, and his current financial situation is stable.  25
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be26
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall security
concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  27
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if, for example, the person
genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or
genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported.
Turning first to the two falsification allegations, as noted in the findings of fact, I
am not persuaded that Applicant made deliberately false statements when he answered
the specified questions on security clearance applications in 2005 and 2009. Instead, he
gave incorrect answers because he did not fully understand the questions. His honest
mistakes in this regard do not raise a security concern.
Turning next to the high-risk sexual behavior that took place during 2002–2008,
that conduct does raise a security concern.  With that said, I have no concern about the28
2002 incident because it occurred about ten years ago when Applicant was on a private
trip to Mexico, and before he had any employment affiliation with the U.S. Government
or a defense contractor. But his conduct in 2004 and 2008 was high-risk behavior that
demonstrated poor judgment. He put himself in a position that created a potential
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. These matters cannot be mitigated
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 29
 AG ¶ 6. 30
8
in light of his dubious explanation for calling the massage parlor in 2008, when away
from home for pre-employment screening with an agency of the federal government.
His explanation—that he was bored and had no intention of following through—is a half
truth, at best. There is no requirement to believe the unbelievable, and his explanation
is simply not believable. His failure to provide full, frank, and candid information during
the hearing not only undermines his credibility, it also casts doubt about how he would
conduct himself if again deployed to Afghanistan in support of the U.S. armed forces.
No mitigation is available under these circumstances. 
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be29
questioned or put into doubt due to an applicant’s foreign connections and interests.
The overall concern under the guideline is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.30
Given the evidence of Applicant’s family ties to Afghanistan, which continues to
be a violent, unsafe, and unstable country, the Government has established its case
under Guideline B. In reaching this conclusion, I considered the following disqualifying
condition: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
The guideline also provides that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
the foreign influence security concern. Given the evidence, I have considered the
following mitigating conditions as most pertinent:
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).31
9
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
The ongoing turmoil and instability in Afghanistan and the heightened risk it
creates place a heavy burden on Applicant to show his family ties to Afghanistan are
mitigated. The evidence shows he has relatively strong family ties. The best evidence
on this point is (1) his immediate family (wife, mother, siblings) are all natives of
Afghanistan, and (2) his wife’s immediate family (mother, father, and siblings) are
citizens of and residents in Afghanistan, which is imputed to Applicant via his marriage.
With that said, I have no concern about his wife, mother, and siblings who no longer live
in Afghanistan and now live in the United States. Likewise, I have no concern about his
annual charitable contribution by sending money to Afghanistan, because it is done as
an act of religious faith as opposed to family ties. And I have no concern about his
irregular and infrequent contact with two cousins in Afghanistan. Considering the
evidence as a whole, including his wife’s regular contact her immediate family in
Afghanistan, I cannot conclude that it is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a
position of compromise or conflict in a security context. The situation in Afghanistan is
too uncertain and unstable to reach that conclusion. This is especially true considering
Applicant is seeking a security clearance to allow him to work as a linguist in
Afghanistan. Accordingly, the foreign influence concern is not mitigated under AG ¶¶
8(a) and (b).  
 
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, the evidence leaves me with
doubt about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. In reaching this conclusion, I
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Indeed, Applicant presented a good deal of
evidence that is quite favorable, including the testimony of three character witnesses
and evidence of his good employment record. I also gave due consideration to the
whole-person concept.  Having done so, I conclude that Applicant has not met his31
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
10
Subparagraphs 1.b–1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e–1.h: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.d–2.g: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline F: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.a For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
