 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-11231   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant initiated and developed a 
relationship with a 13-year-old girl, which resulted in his conviction for endangering the 
welfare of a child. He failed to mitigate the criminal conduct and personal conduct 
concerns raised by his actions. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order (EO) and DoD Directive,1 the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 
2 
 
October 28, 2011, notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him access to classified information and 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to deny his clearance. The SOR detailed the reasons for the action under 
criminal conduct and personal conduct guidelines.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
However, Department Counsel timely requested a hearing under DoD Directive, 
Additional Procedural Guidance ¶ E3.1.7.2 The case was assigned to me on February 7, 
2012. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on April 4, 2012. Department Counsel 
offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant did not submit any documents. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 49, is an employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for his 
employer since November 2009. He is engaged with no children.3 
 
 In 2005, a then 45-year-old Applicant joined a popular social networking site to 
monitor his teenaged nephews’ online activities. In the process of monitoring his 
nephews, he met a 12-year-old girl in a religious-themed chat room on the site.  
Although he did not immediately know her age, he guessed she was a minor by the 
information on her profile and the language she used during their chats. Soon after, the 
two began to exchange e-mails and she sent Applicant a picture. After nine months of 
on-line communication, the girl asked Applicant for his telephone number, which he 
provided. Initially they communicated electronically several times a week and talked on 
the phone at least three times a month. Eventually, Applicant and the girl spoke on the 
phone daily. She always called him. He never called her home. Applicant contends he 
maintained contact with the girl, who he believed to be troubled, to provide her 
encouragement and to watch out for her wellbeing.4  
 
 In February 2006, the girl, who had recently turned 13, invited Applicant to attend 
a recital at her school. He drove 70 miles to attend the program. At their first meeting, 
Applicant presented the child with a bracelet to celebrate an award she received. The 
two also exchanged a hug. Because the child’s ride did not pick her up immediately 
after the program, Applicant and the girl sat in his car for a few hours. She was not 
properly dressed for the cold weather and Applicant wanted to make sure she stayed 
warm. He made a second trip to the girl’s school a few months later, also at her 
invitation, to attend another recital. This time, the child introduced Applicant to several 
people as her father.  After the program, he drove the girl home. Although his memory is 
                                                          
2 Tr. 8. 
 
3 Tr. 14-16. 
 
4 Tr. 16 -24. 
 
 
3 
 
not clear given the passage of time, he believes that he and the girl exchanged a hug 
and no other physical contact during that visit.5  
 
 In February 2007, Applicant made his final visit to the girl’s school, because she 
wanted to give him a birthday present. Applicant arrived at the school, identified himself 
as the child’s father, and attempted to check her out of school. However, an 
administrator intercepted him after being warned by a school counselor that the girl told 
someone that her internet friend was coming to the school to pick her up. The 
administrator escorted Applicant to an office where he was asked to wait. In the 
meantime, the administrator contacted the child’s parents and the sheriff’s deputy 
assigned to the school.6 
 
 Upon questioning from the deputy, Applicant stated that he was the 13-year-old’s 
foster father and that he planned on adopting her when she turned 16 years old. The 
police officer informed Applicant that he knew the child was not up for adoption. 
Applicant then explained that the girl had invited him to the school. The deputy escorted 
Applicant to his car and advised him that the child’s parents did not want him to have 
any further contact with their daughter. After the deputy noticed a set of directions dated 
December 2006 in Applicant’s car, Applicant informed the deputy that he used the 
directions to get to the school on previous occasions.7  
 
 After an investigation by the local sheriff’s department, Applicant was arrested in 
June 2007 on two charges of endangering the welfare of a child and two charges of 
unlawful imprisonment. In July 2008, Applicant pleaded guilty to one count of 
endangering the welfare of child, citing his financial inability to go to trial. As part of his 
sentencing he agreed to have no further communication with his victim. He completed 
his three years of probation in 2011.8 
  
 At hearing, Applicant maintained that he did not engage in any improper conduct 
with his victim and that there was nothing inappropriate about their relationship. He 
believes that she is a wonderful person who needed him as a positive role model. He 
explained that he cultivated a relationship with the child because he believed her to be 
troubled. He was concerned that she was engaged in acts of self-mutilation, in addition 
to suffering from mental health issues, and abuse from her parents. He felt he needed 
to develop a relationship of trust with the girl so that he could alert the proper 
authorities. However, he never reported his concerns about the girl to authorities 
because he knew that their relationship would be viewed with suspicion. In hindsight, he 
believes he could have handled the relationship differently.9  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 23-24, 28-32.  
 
6 GE 4. 
 
7 GE 4. 
 
8 GE 4-5. 
 
9 Tr. 22, 32-34, 45-48. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in 
AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Under AG ¶ 31, the following disqualifying condition applies:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses. 
 
In 2008, Applicant pleaded guilty to one charge of endangering the welfare of a 
child. None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 32 apply. Although, the 
events leading up to Applicant’s arrest and subsequent conviction occurred seven years 
ago, they continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current security worthiness. Applicant 
exhibited poor judgment when he initiated a relationship with a 12-year-old girl he met 
on-line and groomed her by maintaining frequent contact, visiting the her at school on 
multiple occasions, allowing her into his car, and masquerading as her father. He 
continues to show poor judgment in his attempts to legitimize his behavior by casting 
himself as a concerned adult acting in the best interest of what he believed to be a 
troubled child.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following disqualifying condition under ¶ AG 16 is relevant to this case:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country, but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 
6 
 
 Despite his attestations to the contrary, the nature of Applicant’s relationship with 
his 13-year-old victim is perverse on its face and serves as a potential source of 
vulnerability. Furthermore, if his behavior became publicly known it would diminish his 
personal, public and community standing. For the same reasons discussed under the 
criminal conduct guideline, above, none of the mitigating conditions available under AG 
¶ 17 apply to this case.  
 
Accordingly, I have reservations and doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s contention that he maintained a relationship with 
his victim to look out for her is disingenuous. He engaged in predatory behavior toward 
a seemingly troubled child. Even now, he continues to display unrepentant affinity for 
his victim. Instead of taking responsibility for his actions, Applicant blames his victim for 
escalating the relationship to the level that resulted in Applicant’s criminal conviction. 
Applicant’s actions and his attitude regarding his behavior are evidence that he does not 
possess the good character or judgment required of individuals who have access to 
classified information. Clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
