 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-11110    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brian J. Lauri, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. In 2010, Applicant received an 
unpaid, three-day suspension for violating his employer’s information technology and 
labor-charging policies. Applicant demonstrated rehabilitation and these events do not 
serve as a potential source for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 4, 
2012 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR, which 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
detailed the reasons for the action under the use of information technology (IT) systems 
and personal conduct guidelines, recommended the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination to revoke or deny Applicant’s access to 
classified information.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on February 28, 2012. The hearing took place as scheduled on April 5, 
2012. At hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were also 
admitted without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old software engineer. He has held a security clearance 
since 2005 when he began his employment as a federal contractor. He is unmarried 
and has no children.2 
 
 In May 2010, Applicant was confronted by his employer with several allegations 
that he violated company policy including the misuse of his work computer and improper 
labor charging. In response to these allegations, Applicant admitted that between March 
and May 2010, he engaged in the following behavior on his unclassified computer:3  
 
 Applicant used his network privileges to install three unauthorized software 
programs onto his work computer: a software download accelerator, a media player, 
and a tethering program. He used the media player to view and listen to non-work 
related media on his unclassified computer. The tethering program enabled Applicant to 
use his mobile phone as a wireless internet connection, which he used to access his 
employer’s network remotely. As a result of accessing the company network in this 
manner, he was able to bypass the security protocols built into his employer’s network. 
He knew that he did not have permission to download these programs or use an 
alternative protocol to access his employer’s network. He did so believing that these 
programs would make his job easier.4  
 
 Applicant also admits to violating his employer’s labor-charging policies by 
working remotely and charging that time to his project without having a teleworking 
agreement in place.  In response to allegations that he spent an excessive amount of 
time on non-work related media and internet sites, Applicant admitted that he often left 
these types of websites open or ran media (music, television shows, or movies) on his 
unclassified computer while he worked on the classified system. He also admitted that 
he viewed pornography on his work computer once while on a business trip.5  
                                                          
2 Tr. 12-13; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 14-15. 
 
4 Tr. 16-19. 
 
5 Tr. 19-33, 50-53. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 At the conclusion of an internal investigation by the company’s ethics 
organization in June 2010, Applicant received a three-day, unpaid suspension and a 
written warning. He was also ordered to complete training on the labor-charging policy 
and the appropriate use of company assets. In addition, he was warned to expect 
continued monitoring of his company assets and that a future violation of company 
policy could result in his termination. Applicant timely completed all required training and 
executed a telework agreement.  Applicant’s actions did not compromise his employer’s 
IT system or any classified information.6 
 
 Since the 2010 incident, Applicant has received two performance reviews. In his 
2010 review, Applicant’s disciplinary action was briefly mentioned, and he received an 
above-average rating. In the 2011 performance evaluation, Applicant received a 
superior rating with no mention of any disciplinary issues during the rating cycle.7  
 
 During his company’s internal investigation and the security clearance 
adjudication process, Applicant has spoken honestly about his behavior. In his 
responses to DOHA interrogatories and at hearing he admitted that his actions in 2010 
showed lack of judgment.8  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
                                                          
6 Tr. 23-24, 43; GE 2. 
 
7 AE C. 
 
8 Tr. 47-50, GE 2. 
 
4 
 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern for use of information technology systems is set out in AG ¶ 
39:       
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or inability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 40 apply: 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
Applicant abused his network privileges by downloading three unauthorized 
programs. One of these programs resulted in his ability to bypass the security 
 
5 
 
restrictions on his employer’s network. He also admits to using his work computer to 
access non-work related content including television shows, movies, music and, on one 
occasion, pornography. 
 
Of the three mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 41, one is applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s misuse of his work computer, which occurred two years ago, seems 
to have been motivated by convenience, not malice. While Applicant’s desire to use 
new technologies to increase his personal convenience and efficiency remains, he 
appeared contrite and has learned from his mistakes. His unpaid suspension served as 
a wake-up call. In the two years since his behavior was discovered, Applicant’s work 
evaluations have been favorable. He is well regarded by his superiors and has since 
abided by all of his employer’s policies regarding the employee use of work assets and 
IT systems without further incident.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern regarding personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 apply: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or their characteristics indication that the 
 
6 
 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes, 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the work 
place; 
 
(3)  a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
 Applicant admits that he violated his employer’s labor-charging practices by 
working remotely without a telework agreement and spending excessive time on non-
work related content on his work computer during duty hours. Furthermore, Applicant’s 
misuse of his work assets and his employer’s IT systems is indicative of poor judgment 
and shows an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
The guideline notes several mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17. Of these, only 
one applies: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s violation of the labor-charging polices were minor and easily 
remedied. Applicant completed the required training and is now in compliance with his 
employer’s teleworking requirements. The infractions were appropriately handled as a 
personnel issue. Applicant’s misuse of IT systems is mitigated under the personal 
conduct guideline for the same reasons enumerated in the discussion of the use of IT 
systems guideline, above. These incidents do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
security worthiness.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
I have no reservations or doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s conduct was 
limited to a brief period of time, two months. When confronted, Applicant admitted his 
behavior, took responsibility for his actions, and immediately stopped the offending 
conduct. While his actions were wrong, his motivation was benign. Although Applicant, 
given his technical skills, retains the ability to manipulate his employer’s network and 
 
7 
 
hardware, I find that he has learned not to do so for any reason. At hearing he 
demonstrated his understanding of the need to comply with his employer’s polices and 
the consequences of failing to do so. His favorable performance evaluations and his 
total compliance with his employer’s polices in the two years since his employer took 
disciplinary action against him, are strong evidence of rehabilitation. While these events 
have imparted an important lesson to Applicant, they do not serve as a potential source 
for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress. Clearance is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
