 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 10-10976    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant’s most recent 
drug-related arrest occurred over three years ago, it continues to cast doubt on his 
current security worthiness, as do his repeated false statements about the 
circumstances of his 2009 arrest. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 2, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR, which 
detailed the reasons for the action under the drug involvement and personal conduct 
guidelines, recommended the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination to revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on February 7, 2012. The hearing took place as scheduled on April 2, 
2012. At hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were also admitted without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 10, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a federal contractor. Applicant is engaged 
and has no children. He is a high school graduate and has completed one year of 
community college. Since August 2010, he has worked as a security guard. This is his 
first security clearance application.2  
 
 Applicant admits that in 2006 he was arrested after being caught smoking 
marijuana in a park with his friends. He subsequently pleaded guilty to possession of 
marijuana. In April 2009, Applicant was arrested again and charged with possession of 
marijuana. Although he admitted in his security clearance application and in his subject 
interview the arrest and subsequent guilty plea to a disorderly conduct charge, he 
denied that he either possessed or used marijuana on the night he was arrested. He 
also denied, in his subject interview, any knowledge of the illegal drugs that were found 
in his car.3  
 
On a late night in April 2009, a police officer observed Applicant and his 
passenger idling in the parking lot of an apartment complex in a smoke-filled car. The 
officer (PO1) approached the car and asked Applicant and his passenger what they 
were doing there. They claimed to be chatting and smoking cigarettes. When asked, 
both denied smoking marijuana. A second police officer (PO2) arrived on the scene and 
approached the car at the request of PO1. PO2 noted the smell of marijuana coming 
from the interior of the car and that the passenger had blood-shot eyes. Based on these 
observations, PO2 directed Applicant and his passenger to exit the car and sit on the 
curb. When Applicant exited the car, PO2 also smelled marijuana wafting from his 
clothes. After searching the vehicle, PO2 found a cigarette box containing a still-moist, 
partially-smoked, marijuana cigarette and three glassine baggies containing the drug 
underneath the passenger seat. On the ground outside the passenger side of the car, 
PO2 also found the innards of a cigar, which he believed was hollowed out to make a 
marijuana cigarette.4  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. 15-17; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1, GE 3. 
 
4 GE 4. 
 
3 
 
Both Applicant and his passenger denied ownership of the drugs. PO2 told both 
men that if neither claimed responsibility for the drugs they would both be arrested and 
charged with possession of marijuana. As the two men sat on the curb, Applicant claims 
that his passenger asked him to take responsibility for the drugs. In response to his 
pleas, Applicant testified that he responded by sarcastically stating that the drugs were 
his. PO1 heard this statement and recorded it as an admission in his report. PO2 did not 
hear Applicant’s statement, but recorded in his report that the passenger pleaded with 
Applicant to take responsibility for the drugs and that Applicant refused to do so.5  
 
 At hearing, Applicant continued to deny that he possessed, smoked, or knew of 
the marijuana in his car the night he was arrested. Blaming the passage of time, 
Applicant testified that he could not recall all of the details about the night in 2009 when 
he was arrested. When asked specifically about PO2’s observations that the interior of 
Applicant’s car and his clothes smelled of marijuana, Applicant responded that despite 
his previous marijuana use, he could not identify the drug’s smell. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 Tr. 27-29, 41-43; GE 4. 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Under AG ¶ 16, two disqualifying conditions are applicable to this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
a personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefit status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his security clearance application by 
stating that the drugs found in his car in 2009 did not belong to him. The SOR also 
alleges that the Applicant made false statements in his subject interview when he stated 
that he never possessed any drugs and that he had no knowledge of the drugs found in 
his car during his 2009 arrest. A statement is false when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). I find that Applicant did not falsify the statements in his security 
clearance application and during his subject interview that the drugs found in his car 
during the April 2009 arrest were not his. According to the police reports, the drugs and 
the innards of the cigar were found on the passenger side of the car. The evidence does 
not indicate that the marijuana belonged to or was placed in the car by Applicant. 
 
However, I do find that Applicant falsified his statements denying knowledge of 
the drugs found in his car. Although Applicant has consistently maintained this position 
throughout the investigative and adjudicative processes, it is untenable given his 
testimony at the hearing. Despite previous marijuana use, Applicant claims that he does 
not know the drug’s distinct odor. As such, he was unable to tell that his passenger was 
smoking marijuana in his car and not a tobacco cigarette. Not only is Applicant’s 
testimony incredible, this false testimony at the hearing also provides sufficient 
circumstantial evidence of his intent to falsify the statements he made in his subject 
 
5 
 
interview. An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, and candid answers throughout 
the investigation and adjudication process. Anything less provides a rational basis for 
finding against an applicant’s security worthiness. Given that Applicant has repeatedly 
made false statements during the adjudication process, none of the mitigating 
conditions available under AG ¶ 17 apply. 
 
The SOR also cross-alleges Applicant’s 2006 conviction and his 2009 drug-
related arrest as disqualifying under the personal conduct guideline; however, these 
events are more appropriately addressed under the drug involvement guideline.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is explained in AG ¶ 24. 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willing to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 25, two disqualifying conditions are applicable to this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of any drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Applicant admits using and possessing marijuana in June 2006. Although he 
pleaded guilty to a disorderly conduct charge, Applicant was also arrested in April 2009 
for possession of marijuana.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 26 apply. Although 
Applicant’s last contact with illegal drugs occurred over three years ago, the incident 
continues to cast doubts on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. After being convicted of a drug-related crime in 2006, Applicant placed 
himself in a vulnerable position again when he allowed a passenger in his car to use 
marijuana. In addition to the doubts about Applicant’s judgment as explained in the 
discussion of the personal conduct guideline, these incidents also raise doubts about 
Applicant’s willingness to comply with the law.  
 
Accordingly, I have reservations and doubts about Applicant ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. The 2006 and 2009 drug-related incidents occurred when 
Applicant was relatively young. At the time, Applicant was not employed as a federal 
contractor and understandably did not have the maturity and foresight to appreciate the 
consequences of his actions. However, it is not the underlying conduct, while serious in 
its own right, that is most troubling in this case; it is Applicant’s actions during the 
investigative and adjudication processes that diminish his security worthiness. 
 
6 
 
 
On that night in April 2009, Applicant’s passenger may have entered his car with 
an illegal drug in his possession, but Applicant condoned its use in his presence and in 
his car. His now-feigned ignorance of the circumstances that ultimately culminated in his 
arrest raises significant questions about his trustworthiness. Applicant’s choice to 
protect his self-interest by repeatedly making false statements and eschewing 
responsibility for his actions, places his ability to safeguard classified information in 
doubt, especially when the consequences could have a detrimental effect on him. As a 
result, Applicant’s request for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a  - 1.c.:     Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.b.:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.c.:     For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
