 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-10679 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct 
concerns. He had 12 alcohol-related criminal incidents from 1989 to 2009. He has gone 
through alcohol treatment in the past and afterwards continued to drink. He has been 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. Although he has been sober now for over two years, 
this period of abstinence is insufficient to mitigate the concern raised by his long history 
of alcohol dependency and alcohol-related criminal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).1 On February 21, 2012, 
Applicant submitted his Answer and requested a hearing. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 10, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on April 19, 2012 and, after 
coordinating with the parties, scheduled the hearing for May 22, 2012. At hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) and 
interrogatory responses, which were admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, 
respectively. Applicant appeared at the hearing, testified, and called several witnesses. 
He also offered two documents noting his compliance with the terms of his court-
mandated alcohol safety program, which were admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
and B. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 4, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his late forties. Since 2009, he has been employed by a federal 
contractor as a quality assurance inspector. His supervisor and manager both testified 
to Applicant’s stellar performance and dependability. During the hiring process, 
Applicant was upfront and candid about his alcohol-related issues.2 
 
 Applicant recently married for the third time. He has two adult children from a 
previous marriage, and is close to his stepchildren. His wife emotionally testified 
regarding the pain their family went through following Applicant’s last DUI in 2009. She 
also testified to the changes she has seen in Applicant since his latest conviction, not 
the least of which has been Applicant’s dedication to his sobriety and overall recovery.3 
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was twelve. His excessive alcohol use 
has led to twelve separate alcohol-related criminal incidents since 1989, including seven 
DUIs. His excessive alcohol use also was the basis for his discharge from the military 
and contributed to his use of illegal drugs. Applicant has attended both inpatient and 
outpatient treatment programs, but continued to drink afterwards.4 
 
Applicant’s last DUI arrest took place in 2009. After the arrest, Applicant 
completed a 30-day inpatient treatment program, where he was diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent. He was subsequently convicted of DUI and his sentence included probation 
that is scheduled to end in September 2012.5  
 
Applicant last consumed alcohol in about January 2010. He had argued with his 
wife earlier in the day and the stress led him to drink. He had two beers before calling 
his sponsor from Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). His wife caught him drinking and warned 
him that she would leave him if he were to start drinking again. Since this last drink of 
alcohol, Applicant has used his AA support system to avoid drinking. He regularly 
                                                          
2
 Tr. at 32-46. 
 
3
 Tr. at 46-56, 96-97. 
 
4
 Tr. at 75-85, 91-94. 
 
5
 Tr. at 68-72, 85-90; GE 1; GE 2; AE A; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
attends AA meetings and is active in AA. He was unable to stop drinking in the past 
because he was chasing the “dream” of being able to drink like a “normal individual.” He 
now recognizes that he cannot consume any alcohol due to his alcoholism.6 
 
Applicant has held a security clearance in the past. He has never mishandled or 
otherwise compromised classified information. He disclosed his alcohol-related criminal 
incidents on his SCA. During the ensuing background investigation, Applicant fully 
discussed his history of substance abuse.7  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.8 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
6
 Tr. at 50-52, 57-68, 72-75, 86-87, 94. 
 
7
 Tr. at 96; GE 1; GE 2. 
 
8
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern regarding excessive alcohol consumption is articulated at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s twenty-plus year history of alcohol dependency, which has resulted in 
seven DUI convictions and five other criminal charges, directly implicates this concern. 
The evidence also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(d) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized treatment 
program.9 
 
 An applicant may mitigate the excessive alcohol consumption concern by 
establishing one or more of the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
                                                          
9
 ISCR Case No. 07-00558 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008) (Application of AG ¶¶ 22(d) and (e) not limited 
to enumerated professionals). 
 
 
5 
 
 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant successfully completed the inpatient treatment program following his 
last DUI arrest in 2009. He actively participates in AA and has been abstinent since 
2010. He candidly testified about his battle with alcoholism and appears to be on the 
right track to recovery. However, in light of Applicant’s long history of excessive alcohol 
use and repeated relapses following treatment, he failed to establish that alcohol will not 
be a security concern going forward. Accordingly, although AG ¶¶ 23(b) and (d) apply, 
they are insufficient to mitigate the significant security concerns raised by Applicant’s 
long history of excessive alcohol consumption.10  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s long battle with alcoholism has led to twelve alcohol-related criminal 
incidents. This history of criminal conduct itself raises a concern about Applicant’s 
“judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.”11 Although Applicant’s last criminal incident 
was three years ago, it is too soon to conclude that a similar incident will not recur due 
to Applicant’s history of alcohol dependency and repeated relapses.12 Accordingly, at 
this point, Applicant’s alcohol-related criminal conduct remains a concern.13 
 
                                                          
10
 See e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-08708 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007) (Applicant failed to mitigate 
concern raised by his diagnosis of alcohol dependency and abuse of alcohol from 1980s to 2006). 
 
11
 AG ¶ 30. Specifically, I find the evidence establishes AG ¶¶ 31(a), (c), and (d).  
 
12
 AG ¶ 32(d). 
 
13
 Applicant’s arrests in 1995 and 1996 were not alcohol related and are mitigated by the passage 
of time. AG ¶ 32(a) applies to these offenses. I resolve SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).14 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s history of 
properly handling classified information and his honesty throughout the security 
clearance process. However, security clearance adjudications are by their very nature 
“predictive judgments,” where an applicant’s past history is the best indicator of future 
conduct, and the protection of national security is always the paramount concern.15 
Applicant’s past history of problems with alcohol continues to raise doubts about his 
security suitability. Hopefully, he will continue on his current path of recovery and be 
able to establish his security worthiness in the near future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:        Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
14
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
15
 ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) [citing to Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-529 (1988)].   
 
