 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04699 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
During a 1998 security clearance interview, Applicant admitted to security 
violations and sexual criminal conduct. In 2010, and at his hearing, he made false 
statements denying his 1998 admissions. His personal conduct continues to cast 
serious doubt on his judgment, his ability to safeguard classified information, and on his 
ability to comply with the law and regulations. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 6, 2009. 
On January 19, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2012, and requested a 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
decision based on the record. On April 2, 2012, the Government requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Appellate Exhibit 1, Tr. 11) The case was assigned to 
me on April 19, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 30, 2012, convening a hearing for May 
17, 2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted no exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 25, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.c, and 1.f trough 1.k. He admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. After a 
thorough review of all the evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor and 
considered his testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old project management consultant working for a 
Government contractor. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in mechanical 
engineering in 1986, and a master’s degree in technology management in 1995. 
Applicant married his wife in September 1990, and they separated in January 2009. He 
has three sons, ages 19, 17, and 15. 
 
Applicant started working for Government contractors in 1987, and shortly 
thereafter he was granted a secret security clearance, which later was upgraded to a 
top secret clearance. In 1997, he applied for a top secret clearance with access to 
sensitive compartmented information to work for another Government agency (Agency). 
During the background investigation, Applicant participated in three polygraph-assisted 
interviews with the Agency and one with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). For 
his second interview with the Agency, Applicant brought to the interview a list of 15 
topics he intended to discuss with the interviewer. (GE 2) 
 
As a result of the interviews, Applicant disclosed that:  
 
1. Between 1993 and 1995, Applicant worked for a Government contractor 
providing services for a joint operation of U.S. and foreign military forces. During this 
period, he was solicited by three foreign military officers, who identified themselves as 
members of the foreign country’s military intelligence, to work for their organization. He 
was asked to obtain unclassified and classified documents on operational requirements. 
Applicant admitted to giving copies of numerous unclassified briefings to two foreign 
military officers. He never reported these solicitations from foreign military personnel 
until the Agency’s interviews in 1998. 
 
2. He opened a safe containing classified information and allowed a foreign 
military officer to read a classified document. He never reported this incident until the 
Agency interviews in 1998.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 3. In 1993, a foreign contractor asked Applicant to bring a set of viewgraphs to 
the United States. The viewgraphs were classified and marked accordingly. Applicant 
cut off the classification, and cut the axis of the viewgraphs in two. He carried one axis, 
and another person carried the other axis from the foreign country into the United 
States. This was done to “declassify” the document and protect the information. Upon 
his return to the United States, Applicant put the viewgraph together and remarked the 
document with its classification. 
 
4. Between 1994 and 1995, at the insistence of his supervisor, Applicant signed 
fraudulent time sheets for two company employees, which resulted in the company 
paying over 3,500 hour in excess salary. 
 
5. Applicant admitted to physically abusing his children by hitting, choking, and 
intentionally hurting them. He inserted his finger into his then five and three-year-old 
sons’ rectums while cleaning their bottoms. In 1995, he masturbated his then five-year-
old son while he was masturbating himself. (GE 2) 
 
 After the polygraph-assisted interviews, Applicant filed an adverse information 
report on himself. He testified that he reported that, at the request of the project 
manager (a U.S. military officer), he opened the safe for a foreign military officer and 
showed him a classified document. This security violation is summarized in paragraph 
2, above. (Tr. 23, 33-34) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant admitted that he made all the above statements during 
his 1998 polygraph-assisted interviews. He denied, however, that they were true. He 
could not explain why he made the statements if they were not true, but he repeatedly 
denied that the statements were true. In 1998, Applicant’s employment was terminated 
because of his security violations, and his security clearance was revoked. 
 
On April 30, 2010, Applicant provided a sworn statement to a Government 
investigator explaining why he was terminated from his employment with a Government 
contractor and had his clearance revoked in 1998. His April 2010 statement 
contradicted some of the information he provided to the Agency during the 1998 
polygraph-assisted interviews. In the April 2010 statement, Applicant claimed that the 
contract project manager (a U.S. Marine lieutenant colonel) could not find his copy of 
the classified document and asked Applicant to open the safe and show the foreign 
military officer the classified document. Applicant believes that the foreign military officer 
had a confidential security clearance.  
 
Concerning the viewgraph, Applicant again admitted that he cut off the 
classification of the viewgraph, cut the axis in half, and that he brought half of the 
viewgraph to the United States and a U.S. Navy chief engineer brought the other half. 
He stated that the chief engineer asked him to cut the viewgraph in half to conceal the 
nature of the viewgraph. 
 
 
4 
 
 
At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he knew that the chief engineer had 
no authority to change the classification of the document, to cut the document in half, or 
to carry the document to the United States as they did. Nevertheless, Applicant 
complied because he trusted the chief engineer, and he said it was okay. (Tr. 48) 
 
Regarding his interaction with the foreign military intelligence officers, in his April 
2010 statement, Applicant stated:  (GE 3) 
 
I have never had contact with anyone representing a non-U.S. intelligence 
or security service. . . I have never been approached by anyone asking 
me to work for a foreign entity . . . No one has ever asked me to provide 
information, regardless of whether or not officially classified, to a foreign 
entity . . . I have never been asked to work for a foreign intelligence or 
security service . . . I have never agreed to work for a foreign intelligence 
or security service. 
 
Applicant also stated in his April 2010 statement that during Thanksgiving 2008, 
he had threatened his son because he was misbehaving. Applicant explained that he 
had a table knife in his hand and pointed the knife at his son. He denied threatening to 
hurt his son with the knife. His wife asked Applicant to leave the house because she 
believes that Applicant threatened his son with the knife. They separated after this 
incident. (GE 3) I find the evidence is insufficient to establish that Applicant threatened 
his son with a knife. 
 
In his April 2010 statement, Applicant admitted to physically hitting his sons, but 
he denied that he ever sexually abused his sons. He claimed that his 1998 sexual 
abuse statements to the Agency were false. He noted that he was investigated by the 
police and child protective services, and no charges were brought against him. 
Applicant’s hearing testimony was consistent with his April 2010 statement. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 In 1998, Applicant admitted that between 1993 and 1995, he committed a 
number of security violations involving foreign military officers, and that he engaged in 
sexual criminal conduct with two of his sons. On April 30, 2010, Applicant made a sworn 
statement to a Government investigator in which he denied the admissions he made 
during the 1998 interviews. His hearing testimony was consistent with his April 2010 
sworn statement. 
 
 Applicant claimed that his 1998 admissions were false. He could not explain why 
he made such serious, incriminating statements against himself. Considering that he 
brought his own notes with topics of discussion to his second Agency interview, and that 
after the interviews he filed an adverse security information report against himself, his 
 
6 
 
 
claims are not credible. Analyzing the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 
demeanor while testifying, I find that he engaged in all the behavior he disclosed during 
his 1998 interviews. I further find that he falsified material facts in his 2010 affidavit. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven personal conduct conditions that could potentially 
mitigate Applicant’s security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
7 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. I considered as mitigating 
factors that in 1998, Applicant disclosed his questionable behavior to the Agency 
investigators, and that after the interviews he filed an adverse information report against 
himself. However, in April 2010 and at his hearing, he made false statements denying 
all the behavior he disclosed in 1998. Applicant’s false statements are recent. Moreover, 
his false statements constitute a felony, in violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001. 
 
 The behavior Applicant admitted in 1998 raises serious questions about his 
judgment, his ability to protect classified information, and his ability to comply with the 
law, security rules, and regulations. Those security concerns are exacerbated by his 
current falsifications. He has not acknowledged his questionable behavior and he has 
not taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation and 
duress. In sum, Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and under the whole-person concept. 
(AG ¶ 2(c)) In light of Applicant’s age, education, work experience, and his years 
holding a security clearance, Applicant’s personal conduct continues to raise serious 
doubt about his judgment, his ability to protect classified information, and his ability to 
comply with the law and regulations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g, and 
   1.i-1.k:      Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
