 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-04287 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Alcohol Consumption concern. He has a long 
history of excessive alcohol consumption, which has resulted in several alcohol-related 
incidents. Although Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident was five years ago, he 
continues to drink excessively despite a current diagnosis of alcohol abuse. Applicant’s 
inability to curb his excessive alcohol use raises concerns about his suitability for 
access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
G (Alcohol Consumption).1 Applicant submitted his Answer on March 21, 2012, and 
requested a hearing. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 10, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on April 19, 2012 and, after 
coordinating with the parties, scheduled the hearing for May 23, 2012. At hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 5, which were admitted 
without objection.2 Applicant appeared at the hearing with counsel, testified, and called 
several witnesses. He also offered several documents that were admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A – K.3 The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 5, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his late thirties. He grew up in a broken home, and admits that he 
was a “little rebellious” and “got into a little trouble” during his high school years. Shortly 
after graduating from high school in 1992, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He was 
on continuous active duty until his discharge in June 2007. He was first granted access 
to classified information in about 1997 and maintained a clearance without incident until 
his discharge from the Navy. He married in 1994 and has one child from that marriage. 
He divorced in 2004 and married his current wife in 2007.4 
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol in his early teens. He had several alcohol-
related incidents before joining the Navy, to include: shoplifting beer from a convenience 
store, damaging school property, driving while impaired (.12 BAC), and possession of 
alcohol by a minor. He was sentenced to a 14-week “adolescent chemical user group” 
for the shoplifting offense. These four alcohol-related criminal incidents occurred 
between 1990 and 1991.5 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e) 
 
 Applicant’s work performance, throughout his 15-year naval career, was 
exemplary. He deployed on multiple occasions in support of U.S. operations abroad. He 
garnered numerous awards and decorations for his performance. During the later 
stages of his naval career, Applicant voluntarily trained as an explosive ordnance 
demolition (EOD) technician.6 He quickly became a team leader and was viewed by his 
command as a “vital asset.”7 He was able to stay clear of any trouble involving alcohol 
during the early years of his naval career, except for a verbal reprimand for drinking 
while aboard ship in 1996.8 (SOR ¶ 1.f) 
                                                          
2
 The Government offered GE 6 in rebuttal. Applicant objected to its admission on relevance and 
timeliness ground. Applicant’s objection was sustained and the exhibit was not admitted. 
 
3
 Per the prehearing order, Applicant submitted an exhibit list that is included with the case file. 
 
4
 Tr. at 56-58, 71; GE 1 – 2; AE A – C. 
 
5
 GE 2; GE 5; Answer; AE B. See also GE 4. 
 
6
 Tr. at 58-61; AE B – D, AE F – H, AE J. 
 
7
 AE F at 2.  
 
8
 Tr. at 59-60, 78; Answer; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s first serious, alcohol-related incident in the Navy was in 2004, when 
he was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). He had recently returned from a 
tour in Iraq and was at a going-away party for a fellow sailor. He drank about six beers 
and four to six shots of liquor before getting behind the wheel. He was arrested and 
subsequently convicted of DUI. He attended outpatient alcohol treatment through the 
Navy and was diagnosed as alcohol dependent.9 (SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h)  
 
 Following this diagnosis, Applicant continued to drink. In 2006, while overseas, 
he got into an altercation with a fellow sailor. He had consumed about three to four 
beers and a pint of liquor prior to the altercation. He received non-judicial punishment at 
Captain’s Mast and was ordered to attend inpatient alcohol treatment.10 On May 1, 
2007, Applicant successfully completed the requirements of the inpatient program and 
its aftercare requirements. He received a favorable prognosis and was advised not to 
drink alcohol in the future. He was warned by his command that any further alcohol-
related misconduct would result in his discharge from the Navy.11 (SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j) 
 
 Shortly after completing the treatment program, Applicant started drinking again. 
He consumed alcohol at an overseas location where U.S. military personnel are strictly 
prohibited from consuming alcohol. On May 8, 2007, Applicant received non-judicial 
punishment for this alcohol-related incident. The following month, he was 
administratively discharged from the Navy with an under honorable conditions (general) 
discharge for a pattern of alcohol-related misconduct.12 (SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l)  
 
 Six months later, in November 2007, Applicant was able to secure a job as a 
diver for his current employer. A supervisor, who has known Applicant since 1996, 
testified that Applicant is an honest, humble individual, who is trustworthy and reliable. 
Applicant has an excellent reputation at work and performs his work flawlessly. The 
witness has seen Applicant drink alcohol in social settings and is not concerned that he 
has a drinking problem. If the witness did have such concerns, he would not place 
Applicant or other employees’ lives at risk by continuing to let him dive.13  
 
 Applicant’s current wife also testified. She is a U.S. military officer with 22 years 
of service. She holds a bachelor’s degree in psychology and counseling, and previously 
served as an advisor in the military’s drug and alcohol treatment program. She has held 
a security clearance since 1994 and currently holds a top secret clearance with access 
to sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI). She testified in general about their life 
together and specifically how they spend most of their free time tending to their 
                                                          
9
 Tr. at 60-63;GE 1 – 2; GE 4, Subject Interview (SI) at 3; Answer; AE B. 
 
10
 Tr.at 63-68; GE 1 – 2; GE 4, SI at 1-2; Answer; AE B. 
 
11
 Tr. at 79-83; AE E. 
 
12
 Tr. at 68-71, 79-83;GE 1 – 2; GE 4, SI at 2-3; Answer; AE B – C. 
 
13
 Tr. at 18-34, 71. See also AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
obligations, including their home, rental property, and side private business. She noted 
that her disabled mother lives with them and Applicant helps take care of her. She 
describes Applicant as a trustworthy individual, who is a dedicated father.14 She 
acknowledges that Applicant drinks alcohol on the weekends and that she has 
witnessed him drink to the point he was “drunk . . . maybe two to three times in the last 
six months.” She explained that to her “drunk” means that Applicant “has had more than 
four or six beers, four or six drinks.”15 
 
 Applicant submitted his current security clearance application in July 2010. He 
disclosed the alcohol-related incidents that led to his discharge from the Navy.16 During 
the ensuing background investigation, Applicant fully discussed his history of alcohol 
abuse and current level of alcohol use. In August 2010, he told a federal investigator 
that he drank “four to six beers and two to three shots twice a week on Friday and 
Saturday.” He also told the investigator that about once a month when he goes out on 
his “boat he will have 10 beers and five shots.” He went on to define intoxication as 
“when you begin to feel a slight dizziness which is between .10 and falling down,” and 
stated that “will drink to intoxication every other time he drinks.”17 Over a year later, in 
December 2011, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory and confirmed that he 
continued to drink “4 to 6 beers, and 2 to 4 shots – one to two times weekly.” He also 
stated that he drinks to the point of intoxication “2 – 4 times a month,” and that he last 
drank to the point of intoxication a few days before submitting his response.18 
 
 At DOHA’s request, Applicant was recently evaluated by a licensed clinical social 
worker. He was diagnosed with alcohol abuse. During the evaluation, Applicant told the 
social worker that he continues to drink on the weekends and that he “drinks 4-6 beers 
and 2-4 shots of liquor, over a long night of drinking.” He reported that “his last use of 
alcohol was ‘two nights ago’ when he ingested 4-6 beers and 2-4 shots.”19 (SOR ¶ 1.m) 
 
 In his Answer and at hearing, Applicant attempted to backtrack from his earlier 
statements about the amount of alcohol he currently consumes. He claims to drink 
responsibly now, does not drink to the point where he loses control, and stays away 
from all situations that use to lead to trouble in the past. He pointed to a number of 
positive changes in his life, including his marriage and work performance, which he 
claims demonstrate that he no longer has a problem with alcohol.20 
                                                          
14
 Tr. at 35-54; AE K. 
 
15
 Tr. at 45. See also Tr. at 47-48. 
 
16
 GE 1 at 18-22, 39-44. 
 
17
 GE 4, SI at 6. 
 
18
 GE 3. 
 
19
 GE 4, Alcohol Evaluation Report, Social History. 
 
20
 Answer; Tr. at 72-77. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.21 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
21
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern regarding excessive alcohol consumption is articulated at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s long history of alcohol-related incidents that culminated in his 
involuntary separation from the Navy, his past diagnoses of alcohol dependence, and 
his current diagnosis of alcohol abuse, directly implicate this concern. The evidence 
also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as . . . drinking on the job, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(d) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized treatment 
program.22 
 
 An applicant may mitigate the excessive alcohol consumption concern by 
establishing one or more of the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
                                                          
22
 ISCR Case No. 07-00558 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008) (Application of AG ¶¶ 22(d) and (e) not 
limited to enumerated professionals). 
 
 
7 
 
 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Although Applicant’s last alcohol-related 
incident was five years ago, he failed to establish that such behavior will not recur. He 
has a long history of alcohol abuse and continues to drink alcohol to excess. Applicant’s 
current level of consumption, i.e., four to six beers and two to four shots of liquor, is 
about the same amount of alcohol he consumed prior to his 2004 DUI. His consumption 
of alcohol is even greater and far more irresponsible when he goes boating. He 
continues to consume alcohol to the point where he gets drunk.23 Even after the DUI 
and the adverse consequences that cut short his 15-year naval career, Applicant has 
not moderated his alcohol use. He is not currently participating in a treatment program 
or Alcoholics Anonymous. The mitigating value of Applicant’s successful completion of 
the Navy’s inpatient treatment program and the favorable prognosis he received from 
the program is severely undercut by the fact that shortly thereafter he was involved in 
another alcohol-related incident that led to his involuntary separation from the Navy. 
Further, this final incident came after he was advised not to drink again and told by his 
command that a further alcohol-related incident would result in his discharge. 
Additionally, knowing that the Government had current concerns about his alcohol use, 
Applicant decided to drink to excess just a few days before his scheduled alcohol 
evaluation. This leaves me to conclude that Applicant will not or cannot stop or 
moderate his use of alcohol, even when his career or clearance is at stake. Under the 
circumstances, time alone is insufficient to mitigate the security concern at issue. AG ¶¶ 
23(a) – 23(d) do not apply.  
 
                                                          
23
 In resolving the conflicting evidence regarding the extent of Applicant’s alcohol use, I gave 
more weight to the prior consistent statements Applicant made to the investigator, in his DOHA 
interrogatory response, and during his recent alcohol evaluation; and gave less weight to his more recent 
statements in his Answer and at hearing – statements that were made after the potential negative security 
ramifications were clearly evident. Further, Applicant’s prior inculpatory statements are consistent with the 
other evidence, including his wife’s hearing testimony. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).24 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s long and 
distinguished military service, his history of properly handling classified information, his 
current work performance, and his candor during the background investigation. 
However, this favorable information is insufficient to overcome the doubts raised by 
Applicant’s past alcohol problems and questionable decision to continue to consume 
alcohol to excess.25 Hopefully, Applicant will finally come to terms with his alcohol 
issues and be able to re-establish his security worthiness in the future. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:        Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
24
 The adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
25
 ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (“[e]ven years of safeguarding national 
security information may not be sufficient to mitigate” security concern raised by an applicant’s conduct); 
ISCR Case No. 10-02803 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2012) (“Applicant’s documented service to the country 
was record evidence which the Judge had to consider,” but on its own may not be sufficient to overcome 
concerns raised about an applicant’s judgment and reliability). 
 
