 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
                       ) ISCR Case No. 11-00211 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was convicted in March 1990 of felony unlawful contact involving an 
underage niece. In October 2004, he pled guilty to assault for sexual acts committed against 
another niece in January 2004. In March 2007, he was fined for failure to register as a sex 
offender. He did not report his felony charges or his violation of the sex offender registry 
requirement on his July 2010 security clearance application. The Criminal Conduct, Sexual 
Behavior, and Personal Conduct concerns are not fully mitigated. Clearance denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On February 28, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct), as to why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him a security clearance. DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
 
 2 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on March 13, 2012, and he requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 19, 2012, and on April 27, 2012, I 
scheduled a hearing for May 24, 2012. 
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Five Government exhibits (GEs 1-5) and 
three Applicant exhibits (AEs A-C) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
also testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on June 5, 2012. On the 
Government’s motion, and with no objection from Applicant, the SOR was amended, as set 
forth below. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The SOR alleged under Guideline E, subparagraph 3.b, that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his July 22, 2010 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in 
that he responded “No” to 22.b concerning any arrests in the last seven years and omitted 
his arrests in 2004 for unlawful sexual conduct and in 2006 for violation of the sex offender 
registry.
1
 Applicant testified that he believed he had been summoned but not arrested for 
failure to register as a sex offender in 2006. At the close of the evidentiary record, the 
Government moved to amend the SOR, to delete from SOR 3.b that Applicant had failed to 
disclose that he had been arrested in November 2006, and to add a new subparagraph 3.d 
alleging that Applicant falsified his e-QIP by responding “No” to question 22.a concerning 
whether he had been summoned to court in the last seven years, as follows.  
 
  d. You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing, signed by you on July 22, 2010, in response to 
section 22.a, “Have you been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear 
in court in a criminal proceeding against you? Are you on trial, or awaiting a 
trial on criminal charges, or are you currently awaiting sentencing for a 
criminal offense? You answered “No” and deliberately omitted the 
information set forth in subparagraph 1.c, above. 
 
Applicant did not object to the proposed amendments, although he denied intentional 
falsification of his e-QIP. Accordingly, I granted the Government’s motion while advising 
both parties that the burden of proving Applicant deliberately falsified his e-QIP, as set forth 
in newly amended SOR 3.b and 3.d, remained on the Government. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR as amended alleges under Guideline J that Applicant was convicted in 
March 1990 of felonious unlawful sexual conduct, and sentenced to four years in prison 
                                                 
1
After reviewing the e-QIP (GE 1), I note that Applicant answered “Yes” rather than “No” to 22.b, although he 
listed only an arrest for simple assault in October 2004. The Government did not move to correct the obvious 
error. 
 
 3 
(three years suspended) and required to register as a sex offender (SOR 1.a); that he was 
charged with unlawful sexual conduct and assault in January 2004, and convicted of the 
assault (SOR 1.b); that he was convicted of failing to comply with the sexual offender 
registry requirement in November 2006 (SOR 1.c); and that he committed a felony violation 
by falsifying multiple responses on his July 22, 2010 e-QIP (SOR 1.d). Applicant was 
alleged under Guideline D to have had inappropriate sexual contact with two minor 
females, leading to the criminal charges in SOR 1.a and 1.b (SOR 2.a). Under Guideline E, 
Applicant allegedly falsified his July 2010 e-QIP by responding “No” and omitting pertinent 
criminal charges from questions 22.c (any felony charges ever) (SOR 3.a), 22.b (any 
arrests within the last seven years) (SOR 3.b), and 22.a (any summons within the last 
seven years) (SOR 3.d). The criminal conduct and inappropriate sexual contact were also 
cross-alleged under Guideline E (SOR 3.c). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted with clarification the criminal 
charges and sentences in Guideline J. He admitted without explanation the inappropriate 
sexual contact with two underage females, as alleged in Guideline D. He denied that he 
knowingly failed to comply with the sex offender registry requirement or that he intentionally 
falsified his e-QIP. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After 
reviewing the exhibits and transcript, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old welder/fabricator, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since about August 2010. (Tr. 40.) He has been married since June 2008. (GE 
1.) He and his spouse have two children: a daughter almost four years old and a son under 
six months old. (Tr. 71.) Applicant seeks his first security clearance. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested in state X as a juvenile for having inappropriate contact 
(“more of a touch”) with a minor female younger than him. (Tr. 41-42, 44.) He pled no 
contest to a charge of gross sexual misconduct and was sent to a youth center, where he 
had some counseling. (GE 3; Tr. 45, 72.) Around August 1988, when he was 17, Applicant 
fondled his then five-year-old niece. When confronted by his sister, Applicant admitted the 
sexual contact. In late September 1988, Applicant’s sister reported him to state X’s 
Department of Human Services Child Protection Division after she learned of a second 
incident of abuse. In November 1988, Applicant was indicted on a felony charge of 
unlawful sexual contact. Applicant was convicted of the charge in March 1990, although he 
does not believe that anything untoward happened. He remembers the girl being on top of 
him when he woke up (Tr. 47), but he denies he touched her. Applicant testified that he 
accepted a plea bargain because he feared being found guilty at a trial where it would have 
been his niece’s word against his. Applicant was sentenced to serve one year of a four-
year prison term and placed on four years of probation. (GEs 3, 5; Tr. 47-49.) In March 
1991, the state moved to revoke his probation for being near a minor under age 15. (Tr. 
50.) Probation was continued for 18 months. On October 8, 1993, his probation was 
terminated, and he was incarcerated until August 8, 1994. (GEs 4, 5.) Applicant received 
no counseling in prison. (Tr. 72.) After he was released, he attended a few sessions of sex 
offender counseling. (Tr. 57, 72.) 
 
 4 
 
 Around June 2003, Applicant began traveling out-of-state for work with a marine 
company in state Y. (GE 1.) He claims that he established residency in state Y around that 
time (Tr. 32), although he continued to rent premises with his mother in state X (GEs 1, 3), 
register his vehicle in state X, and return to state X on weekends. (GE 3; Tr. 59.)  
 
 Five or six times over the course of a few weeks in January 2004, Applicant had 
criminal sexual contact in state X with the 14-year-old daughter of another sister. In early 
February 2004, Applicant’s niece informed her mother that Applicant had touched her 
private parts. Applicant was told by his sister that he was not welcome in her home. The 
police investigated on a complaint by a third party. Applicant was arrested after his niece 
indicated that he had penetrated her vagina with his fingers. In March 2004, he was 
indicted for unlawful sexual contact, a Class C felony offense, and for assault, a Class D 
offense. In October 2004, Applicant pled guilty to the assault charge, and on November 9, 
2004, the unlawful sexual contact charge was dismissed, and he was sentenced to 90 days 
in the county jail in state X for assault. (GE 3; Tr. 52-55.) Applicant did not seek out any 
counseling other than “a little bit of research online, kind of self-counseling.” (Tr. 72.) He 
admits that he “was attracted to” his niece, but asserts that he “found the problems” that he 
had with himself and had “grown from that.” (Tr. 56-57.) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from October to December 2005. His address of record 
was in state X. (GE 1.) According to his e-QIP, Applicant then worked until May 2006 for a 
technical services company in state Y. Paystubs reviewed for December 18, 2005 through 
April 22, 2006, show he was paid not by the technical services company listed on his e-
QIP, but rather by a subcontractor for the marine company in state Y. Applicant maintains 
that his worksite remained in state Y, although his paystubs for that period show no 
address for him or his employer. (Tr. 26-31.) Around February 2006, Applicant bought a 
home in state Y. (GE 1.) 
 
 On November 14, 2006, law enforcement in state X received information that 
Applicant was living in the state and was a convicted sex offender. Criminal checks 
confirmed Applicant’s felony conviction in 1990 for unlawful sexual contact, and he had not 
complied with state X’s sex offender registry.
2
 The police informed Applicant on November 
15, 2006, that he was in violation of the sex offender registration act. On November 19, 
2006, the police interviewed Applicant to determine whether he had been a resident of the 
state for at least five days, and if he had begun the process of registering as a sex 
offender. Applicant told the police that he frequently traveled out of the state for work, and 
that he had not been notified to register. Applicant gave the police a local address in state 
X, and he admitted that his motor vehicle was registered in the state. He indicated that 
within the past day or so, he had received two letters from the state informing him of his 
                                                 
2
Under Chapter 15 § 11202 of state X’s Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act of 1999, the sex 
offender registration act applies to a person sentenced in state X on or after January 1, 1982, for a sex offense 
or a sexually violent offense as an adult or as a juvenile sentenced as an adult unless excepted. Under 
Section 11202-A, which was amended in 2009, Applicant would not now be required to register if he provided 
documentation establishing that he was finally discharged from the correctional system (which includes 
completing probation) at least 10 years before providing the documentation. 
 
 
 5 
duty to notify local law enforcement of his sex offender status within 24 hours, which he 
had not done.
3
 Applicant was arrested for failure to comply with the state’s sex offender 
registration act, first offense, a Class D crime.
4
 In January 2007, Applicant pled not guilty. 
On March 12, 2007, Applicant entered a guilty plea, and he was sentenced to pay fines 
and fees totaling $310. (GEs 3, 4.) Applicant now challenges the validity of the charge, 
contending that he was not a resident of state X as of November 2006. He kept his driver’s 
license and vehicle registration in state X because it was cheaper for him to do so. (Tr. 61.) 
He “only occasionally came up to [state X].” (Tr. 58-61.) About his guilty plea, Applicant 
testified, “I think I just thought that they, you know, might have enough evidence to uphold 
what they. . . .” (Tr. 62.)
5
 As of May 15, 2007, Applicant was not required to register as a 
sex offender in state Y. (GE 3.) 
 
 Around October 2008, Applicant was laid off from his employment with the marine 
company. He was unemployed until March 2009. He then worked for a local welding 
company in state Y until June 2010. (GE 1.) 
 
 On July 22, 2010, Applicant executed an e-QIP for his current employment with a 
defense contractor. He responded “No” to questions 22.a, concerning whether he had 
been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding 
against him in the last seven years, and 22.c, about whether he had ever been charged 
with a felony offense. Applicant answered “Yes” to 22.b, concerning any arrests within the 
last seven years, and he disclosed that he had been arrested in October 2004 for simple 
assault, for which he served 90 days. (GE 1.) 
 
 On September 22, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant claimed he could not describe what 
led to his arrest for assault in 2004. He expressed his belief that he had not been convicted 
while indicating that he had been required to register as a sex offender after the incident. 
Applicant denied any recall of the November 2006 charge or the conduct that may have led 
                                                 
3
State sex offender registry records indicate that letters were sent to Applicant notifying him that he had to 
register on June 6, 2006, June 23, 2006, and October 4, 2006. The first letter was returned address unknown. 
However, the second and third letters were not returned to the registry. (GE 3.) Presumably, Applicant 
received the letters well before he was contacted by the police in November 2006. 
 
4
The police filed an arrest report (GE 3) identifying Applicant as the arrestee, a charge of sex offender violation 
for failure to register under § 11227, and an arrest date of November 19, 2006, at 1715 hours, with booking at 
1719 hours. Available court records show that Applicant was bailed on November 19, 2006, on payment by 
check of $400 by a third party. A bench notice for a trial on March 12, 2007, was mailed to Applicant’s counsel, 
who had been appointed on January 3, 2007. 
 
5
Applicant presented wage and earning statements for his employment with the subcontractor from December 
18, 2005, to April 22, 2006, and as a direct hire for the marine company in state Y from January 7, 2007, 
through June 29, 2007. He testified that he was unable to find the paystubs that could conclusively establish 
his domicile in state Y from May 2006 through December 2006. (Tr. 29-31.) Applicant indicated on his e-QIP 
that he worked as a welder for a manufacturing company in state Y from June 2006 to August 2006, when he 
then started with the marine company. (GE 1.) Even if he had established his domicile in state Y by November 
2006, it would not explain his failure to register as a sex offender in state X before February 2006, when he 
apparently bought his home in state Y. 
 
 
 6 
to a charge against him. He had no explanation for his omission of the charge from his e-
QIP. (GE 2.) 
 
 On November 21, 2011, at DOHA’s request, Applicant provided the arrest and court 
records of his 1988 unlawful sexual contact, 2004 assault, and 2006 noncompliance with 
the sex offender registry offenses, including a police report indicating that Applicant was 
arrested at 1715 hours on November 19, 2006, for violation of § 11227 (failure to comply 
with sex offender registration act). Applicant explained his omission of criminal charges 
(the 1988 felony unlawful sexual contact conviction, 2004 felony unlawful sexual charge, 
and 2006 misdemeanor sex offender registry conviction) from his July 2010 e-QIP, as 
follows: 
 
The application as I understood, explained going back 10 years and the 
charge was beyond that time frame. I do not believe [that] the charge was a 
felony. I did not recall the charge for failing to register . . . At no time was I 
trying to hide my criminal record or conduct. Apologies. (GE 3.) 
 
 When he answered the SOR in March 2012, Applicant indicated that he thought he 
only had to go back ten years on the felony question. As for omitting the failure to register 
as a sex offender offense, Applicant admitted that he had been fined $310, but he was not 
arrested. He was told to appear in court on a given date. When asked at his hearing about 
his failure to disclose on his e-QIP that he had been charged with felony unlawful sexual 
contact in 1988 and in 2004, Applicant responded that he understood the 1988 charge was 
a felony, but he thought he was required to report offenses that occurred within the last 
seven years, or ten years if it involved alcohol or drugs. (Tr. 66-67.) As for the 2004 felony 
charge, Applicant claimed that he thought he was charged only with simple assault since 
he was given a plea bargain. (Tr. 69.) Applicant initially had no explanation for his failure to 
disclose the November 2006 failure to register as a sex offender charge (“I don’t know”). 
(Tr. 68.) When asked a second time, Applicant stated, “I didn’t remember to put it down.” 
(Tr. 69.) 
 
 Applicant testified without corroboration that he told his spouse about the charges 
involving his niece in 2004 (“explained what my charges were and what happened. It was 
nothing I hid from her”). He is “pretty sure” that he also informed her about the 1988 
unlawful sexual contact charge as well. (Tr. 70-71.) Concerning whether anyone at work 
knows about his criminal record, Applicant testified that security was aware because he 
went over his paperwork with them. (Tr. 69.) Applicant is willing to go to counseling to 
obtain his security clearance. (Tr. 90.) 
 
 Applicant has been a good worker for his defense contractor employer. He follows 
procedures, pays attention to detail, and exhibits a desire to learn. (AEs A-C.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
 7 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern about Criminal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, 
it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.” The security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple 
lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless 
 
 8 
of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted,” apply 
because of Applicant’s convictions for felony unlawful conduct involving his five-year-old 
niece in 1988; for sexually assaulting a 14-year-old niece in 2004; and for failing to register 
as a sex offender. AG ¶ 31(e), “violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a 
court-mandated rehabilitation program,” is also implicated. Applicant violated his probation 
for his felonious sexual contact in 1988 by having contact with a female minor, and he was 
incarcerated from October 1993 to August 1994. Furthermore, Applicant’s deliberate 
omissions of his felony sexual contact and misdemeanor violation of the sex offender 
registry act from his e-QIP (see Personal Conduct, infra) violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001, and 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31(c). 
 
 It has been over 20 years since Applicant’s felony conviction, but that offense 
cannot be viewed in isolation from his subsequent sexual assaults in January 2004, his 
failure to register as a sex offender in 2006, or his felonious false statements on his July 
2010 e-QIP. Potentially mitigating condition AG ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since 
the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment,” is not established in light of his repeated sexual assaults on an underage 
female in 2004 and his more recent false statements on his e-QIP in July 2010. 
 
 Applicant now believes he did not sexually assault his then five-year-old niece in 
1988. He testified that he remembers the girl being on top of him when he woke up, but he 
did not touch her. He pled guilty because he was afraid of being convicted. The evidence 
shows that as a juvenile, he pled no contest to a charge of gross sexual misconduct (not 
alleged), for which he was sent to a youth center. He admits the sexual assaults committed 
in 2004. His pattern of sexual assault on female minors makes it difficult to accept his 
present denials of any wrongdoing in 1988. Furthermore, his sister told the police that he 
had admitted having sexual contact with her daughter in 1988. AG ¶ 32(c), “evidence that 
the person did not commit the offense,” is not established. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(c) also does not apply to his failure to register as a sex offender. On 
November 19, 2006, Applicant told the police that he had received two letters within the 
last day or two advising him of his duty to notify local law enforcement of his sex offender 
status within 24 hours. State records indicate Applicant likely received notification well 
before November 2006. He was sent two letters in June 2006 and another letter in October 
2006. The second and third letters were not returned to the state. Applicant spent some 
weekends in state X, and he had an address for mail delivery in state X. 
 
 Applicant’s good work record with the defense contractor, and the stability of his 
lifestyle since his marriage in June 2008, are indicators of reform under AG ¶ 32(d), “there 
is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” That being 
said, Applicant’s present denial of any culpability in the 1988 felony sexual contact 
involving his then five-year-old niece, and his lack of full candor about his criminal record 
 
 9 
on his e-QIP, undermine his reform. The Criminal Conduct security concerns are not fully 
mitigated. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concerns about Sexual Behavior are set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability 
to protect classified information. 
 
 AG ¶ 13(a), “sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted,” applies not only to his felony conviction for unlawful sexual conduct in 
1988, but also to his assault conviction involving another niece in 2004. Applicant admits 
that he repeatedly had unwanted sexual contact with this niece around January 2004. AG ¶ 
13(d), “sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects a lack of discretion or 
judgment,” is established in that Applicant’s abuse of two underage female family members 
reflects extremely poor judgment on his part. Furthermore, concerns of potential 
vulnerability because of this sexual misconduct arise under AG ¶ 13(c), “sexual behavior 
that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress.” Applicant 
apparently told his spouse about the charges involving his older niece in 2004. He also 
testified he told her what happened. However, there is no confirmation that his spouse 
knows about the full extent of his misconduct, or that he “did time” for abusing a five-year-
old niece. Also, it is unclear to what extent his employer is aware of his past sexual 
misconduct. Security personnel at work are aware of his criminal record from reviewing his 
paperwork with him. A review of his e-QIP would have given them no reason to know that 
Applicant was convicted of any offense of a sexual nature. He listed only that he was 
convicted in 2004 of “simple assault.” 
 
 None of the potentially mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant was a juvenile 
when he pled no contest to gross sexual misconduct. He was only 17, although punished 
as an adult, when he had illegal sexual contact with a five-year-old niece. However, his 
repeated sexual assault of another niece in 2004, when he was 32 years old, precludes 
mitigation under AG ¶ 14(a), “the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and 
there is no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature.” 
 
 AG ¶ 14(b), “the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is also not satisfied. It has 
been eight years since Applicant’s last sexual assault, but there was 15 years between his 
sexual assaults of his two nieces. Furthermore, Applicant has received no professional 
counseling since 2004. His online research is not enough to guarantee against recurrence. 
 
 
 10 
 Applicant’s uncorroborated claims that he has informed his spouse of what 
happened between him and his niece in 2004, and that security personnel at work are 
aware of his criminal past, do not prove that “the behavior no longer serves as a basis for 
coercion, exploitation, or duress,” under AG ¶ 14(c). As noted under Guideline J, supra, it 
is unclear what, if anything, Applicant told his spouse about his unlawful sexual conduct in 
1988. Security personnel would have no reason to know of the sexual nature of Applicant’s 
criminal conduct from reviewing the e-QIP. Sexual contact with underage females is not 
consensual. AG ¶ 14(d), “the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet,” 
is clearly inapplicable in this case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about Personal Conduct are set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 On his July 2010 e-QIP, Applicant disclosed that he had been arrested for simple 
assault under 22.b, concerning whether he had been arrested within the last seven years. 
Applicant responded “No” to the remaining police record inquiries, including 22.a about 
whether he had been issued a summons in the last seven years, and 22.c about whether 
he had ever been charged with a felony offense. The evidence establishes that Applicant 
should have responded “Yes” to 22.c and disclosed both his felony conviction for unlawful 
sexual contact committed in August 1988 and the felony charge for unlawful sexual contact 
in January 2004. Also, Applicant was required to disclose his conviction for failing to 
register as a sex offender. The police filed an arrest report (GE 3) identifying Applicant as 
the arrestee, a charge of sex offender violation for failure to register under § 11227, and an 
arrest date of November 19, 2006, at 1715 hours, with booking at 1719 hours. Available 
court records show that Applicant was bailed on November 19, 2006, on payment by check 
of $400 by a third party. A bench notice for a trial on March 12, 2007, was mailed to 
Applicant’s counsel, who had been appointed on January 3, 2007. Sufficient evidence 
exists to conclude that Applicant should have reported his failure to register as a sex 
offender in response to the arrest record inquiry, although had he listed the offense in 
response to 22.a (any summons), he would have bolstered his credibility on the falsification 
issue. 
 
 Applicant’s claimed inability to recall the details of his offenses when he was 
interviewed in September 2010, and his inconsistent explanations for his failure to fully 
disclose his criminal offenses on his e-QIP, make it difficult to believe he had no intent to 
conceal or deceive. Applicant was not asked about the August 1988 sexual abuse in his 
September 2010 interview. In his November 2011 response to interrogatories and in his 
Answer, he attributed the omission of his felony conviction from his e-QIP to a belief that 
 
 11 
he had to disclose only offenses within the last ten years. At his hearing, he testified that 
he thought he had to go back seven years. Concerning his failure to disclose a more recent 
charge of felony unlawful sexual contact in 2004, Applicant told the OPM investigator that 
he did not believe he had been convicted of the assault. He did not tell the investigator that 
he had also been charged with felony unlawful sexual contact in 2004. In November 2011, 
he told DOHA that he did not believe he was charged with a felony in 2004. At his hearing, 
he testified that since he had been given a plea bargain, he thought he had been charged 
only with assault. Concerning his omission of his November 2006 arrest from his e-QIP, 
Applicant claimed during his interview that he did not know why he failed to list it. Applicant 
denied any recall of the charge, including the nature of the conduct, when it happened, why 
he was involved, or if he was arrested, charged, cited, or convicted. In November 2011, he 
told DOHA he did not recall the charge. When he answered the SOR, he indicated that he 
did not believe he was arrested in that he was told to appear in court on a given date and 
assessed a fine, which he paid. At his hearing, Applicant initially had no explanation for 
why he did not list the offense if he knew he had to report charges within the last seven 
years. He later claimed he did not remember the charge. 
 
 No one reading Applicant’s e-QIP would have reason to know that he had been 
convicted of a sexual crime, never mind a felony offense. He was also not candid about his 
past criminal conduct when he was interviewed by the OPM investigator. It is difficult to 
conclude that Applicant acted in good faith when he failed to disclose in answer to question 
22.a or 22.b that he had been fined as recently as March 2007 for failure to register as a 
sex offender. It is simply not credible for him to claim that he did not recall anything about 
it. Viewing the evidence as a whole, I am led to conclude that Applicant concealed 
information about his criminal record that would implicate him in the sexual assaults of 
underage female family members. AG ¶ 16(a) applies: 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, 
or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant’s sexual behavior of a criminal nature also raises concerns about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. In addition to implicating the security concerns in 
AG ¶ 15, his sexual misconduct raises vulnerability concerns in AG ¶ 16(e), “personal 
conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.” 
 
 During his interview in September 2010, Applicant had the opportunity to mitigate 
his failure to fully disclose his criminal sexual misconduct on his e-QIP through a “good-
faith effort to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted 
with the facts,” under AG ¶ 17(a). Instead, he claimed to have no recall about the 
November 2006 charge, and he denied he was convicted of any charges in 2004. His lack 
of candor during this interview could raise independent security concerns under AG ¶ 16(b) 
 
 12 
(“deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
government representative”), although the Government did not allege a lack of candor 
during his interview with the OPM investigator.
6
 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is 
not pertinent to falsification of a security clearance application signed under advisement 
that a knowing and willful false statement can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both 
under 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Deliberate false statements made on a security clearance 
application are serious, and when Applicant is unwilling to acknowledge his lack of candor, 
it is very difficult to apply AG ¶ 17(c) or AG ¶ 17(d), “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” 
 
 Similarly, AG ¶ 17(d) does not mitigate the judgment concerns raised by his sexual 
misconduct and failure to comply with the sex offender registry requirement when he is 
unwilling to acknowledge his culpability of any wrongdoing in the 1988 assault or 2006 
failure to register as a sex offender. Furthermore, for the reasons stated under Guideline D, 
supra, Applicant’s evidence falls short of mitigating the vulnerability concerns. Assuming he 
has not hidden his criminal past from his spouse, AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken 
positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” 
is only partially established without information corroborating that she knows Applicant 
abused a five-year-old niece in 1988 or that he repeatedly sexually assaulted a 14-year-old 
niece in 2004. The Personal Conduct concerns have not been adequately mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
7
 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
                                                 
6 
In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for the whole-person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3. 
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 
24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for the five above purposes, and not for any other 
purpose. 
 
7
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
 13 
to consider Applicant’s extremely poor judgment in sexually abusing his underage nieces. 
Applicant recognizes that he was attracted to his then 14-year-old niece, which led him to 
assault her repeatedly in 2004. There is no evidence that this sexual misconduct has been 
repeated, but he also has had no formal counseling that would ensure against recurrence. 
Applicant is credited with efforts to stabilize his lifestyle through marriage, stable work, and 
homeownership. At the same time, he showed an unacceptable tendency to act in self-
interest by omitting the most serious of his criminal conduct from his e-QIP. His present 
denials of culpability with regard to the 1988 and 2006 offenses continue to cast doubt on 
his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is well settled that once a concern arises 
regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against 
the grant of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). Based on the facts before me and the 
adjudicative guidelines that I am bound to consider, for the aforesaid reasons, I am unable 
to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a-1.d: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a-3.c: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d:  For Applicant
8
  
  
                                                                                                                                                             
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
8 
Given Applicant was arrested and booked on November 19, 2006, SOR 3.d is resolved in his favor. The SOR 
as amended no longer alleges in SOR 3.b that Applicant failed to disclose his November 2006 charge in 
response to question 22.b. However, SOR 3.b is resolved against Applicant. While the allegation is inaccurate 
in that Applicant answered “Yes” to question 22.b, the Government met its burden of proving that Applicant 
deliberately omitted that he had been arrested in 2004 for felony sexual contact, as alleged. 
 
 14 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
