 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04421 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 June 29, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns raised by 
his unpaid debts totaling $31,921. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on March 19, 2012, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 7, 2012, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on May 24, 2012. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 8, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered no documentary evidence, and 
testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 5, 
2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is currently 
married to his second wife. Applicant and his first wife divorced in July 1995. Applicant 
has two adult children with his first wife and a three-year-old daughter from his second 
marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 21-25, 33.) 
 
 Applicant has financial problems that date back as far as 1983. Applicant was 
struggling with finances at that time and began taking money out of a cash register at 
the retail store where he worked. He stole $1,400. He used the money to satisfy his 
debts. Applicant’s theft was discovered, he was arrested, and he was convicted of 
misdemeanor embezzlement. (GE 2; Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted to 12 creditors in the total amount of 
$31,921. In addition, he failed to file his state tax returns for tax years 1993 through 
2001. In his Answer, Applicant admitted each debt, with the exception of those listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m, which he denied. Each debt can be found listed in credit reports 
dated June 18, 2004; November 19, 2010; November 8, 2011; April 24, 2012; and May 
24, 2012; as well as Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories. Applicant attributed his 
financial difficulties to “an inconsistent employment history.” He indicated that many of 
his delinquent accounts first became delinquent in 1995. At that time, he was living on a 
month-to-month basis, trying to support his wife and children. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 
5; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; Tr. 24-25.) His debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a judgment against him in the amount of $1,570, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant testified he could not recall if he satisfied this judgment. 
Applicant’s most recent credit report reflects that the debt is still past due. Applicant has 
not contacted the creditor to arrange repayment or to contest this debt. (GE 5; Tr. 40-
42.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $324, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. He has not contacted the creditor to arrange repayment. This account has 
been past due since 2010. (GE 5; Tr. 43.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a medical account in the amount of $665, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant testified that this debt was for a dental bill. He has not contacted 
the creditor to arrange repayment. (GE 5; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $14,817, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt was for a personal loan from a credit union made in 
2006. Applicant has not made any payments on this debt in the past five years, and he 
has not had any contact with this creditor in three to four years. (GE 5; Tr. 46-48.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $592, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt was for a cell phone that Applicant used between 2000 and 2005. 
Applicant testified that he has not had contact with this creditor since 2005. (GE 5; Tr. 
48-49.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $441, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f. Applicant testified that this debt was also for a cell phone. He has not 
contacted the creditor or made payments on this account. (GE 6; Tr. 48-49.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $4,506, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt was for a car that Applicant purchased in 2005. The 
vehicle was repossessed in December of 2011. Applicant ceased making payments on 
the vehicle in 2008. (GE 5; Tr. 51-53.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $46, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. This debt was for a home phone line. Applicant has not contacted this 
creditor to arrange repayment of this debt. (GE 5; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $440, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt was for another cell phone that Applicant used between 2006 and 
2008. Applicant has not contacted this creditor to arrange repayment. (GE 5; Tr. 55-56.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government on a tax debt in the amount of 
$5,000, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. Applicant testified that while he filed his tax returns, he 
failed to pay what he owed the IRS for approximately four different tax years. He 
indicated that he has not entered into a repayment plan or satisfied this debt. (GE 3; Tr. 
57-59.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to his state government on a tax debt in the amount of 
$3,000, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant testified that the state entered a garnishment 
against him and was taking $100 out of each of his paychecks from one, but not both, of 
his part-time jobs. Applicant has not contacted the state to arrange further payments. 
He testified that between 1993 and 2001, he did file his state tax returns in a timely 
manner, but that he did not pay what he owed the state in taxes. However, he admitted 
in his Answer that he did not file his state taxes between 1993 and 2001, and he failed 
to produce evidence establishing that he filed them as he claimed. (GE 3; Tr. 60.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to his state’s department of motor vehicles in the amount of 
$550, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l. This debt was incurred when Applicant failed to pay the 
registration fees on his vehicle in 2010. Applicant has not satisfied this debt. (GE 3; Tr. 
55-57.) 
 
 Applicant is currently working two part-time jobs and his wife is employed full 
time, however he said that, “dealing with the household finances is really tough.” He 
does not have funds available to satisfy his past debts and is focusing their family 
income on meeting their current needs. He has been late on his rent for his current 
 
4 
 
residence and has had to satisfy late fees for the late rent payments. He testified that he 
has not taken any actions on the debts listed on the SOR because he earns less than 
he spends each month. (Tr. 25-28, 66-67.) 
 
 Applicant also indicated that he has asked his wife to join him in receiving debt 
counseling, but that their marital relationship is failing due to financial stress. He 
indicated his wife will not agree to attend any debt counseling with him. (Tr. 29, 70.) 
 
 Applicant failed to introduce any evidence of good character, trustworthiness, or 
honesty. He testified that he would not do anything to jeopardize the national interests 
of our country. (Tr. 67.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
5 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial issues; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial delinquencies. His debts have remained 
unresolved for a number of years. Further, he admitted in his Answer that he failed to 
file his state tax returns for tax years 1993 through 2001. He failed to present any proof 
that he did in fact file them, as he claimed in his testimony. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the disqualifying conditions set forth above. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debt is recent and ongoing. He failed to address any of his delinquent 
accounts, including his tax debts to the Federal Government. While he attributed his 
debts to periods of unemployment, he and his wife are currently employed but are 
unable to meet their current expenses. Applicant has not acted responsibly under the 
circumstances by continuously living beyond his means. There are no indications that 
their financial problems are resolved or under control, nor has there been a good faith 
effort to resolve any of the debts. He has not received any financial counseling nor has 
he shown any effort to repay his creditors. While he testified that his state tax debt is 
being repaid through garnishment, he failed to produce evidence to support this claim. 
Further, the garnishment is involuntary and does not establish good judgment on the 
part of Applicant. He failed to provide documented proof regarding any disputes with his 
creditors. The financial concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has made irresponsible financial choices that do not demonstrate the 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. There are 
significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment, and he 
remains at substantial risk of pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a~1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
