 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00140  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Farhan Thura, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a naturalized citizen of the 
United States originally from Syria and Lebanon, maintains close familial relationships 
with family members who are Lebanese citizens. However, the record establishes that 
in the years Applicant has lived in the United States, he has cultivated a network of 
family and friends and accumulated significant U.S.-based assets that firmly root him to 
the United States, thereby mitigating the foreign influence concerns raised in this case. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order (EO) and DoD Directive,1 the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
January 3, 2012, notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to deny his access to classified information. DOHA 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke his clearance. The SOR detailed the reasons for the action under 
Guideline B (foreign influence).  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on January 23, 2012, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on March 23, 2012. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on 
May 22, 2012. Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which 
were admitted. Applicant testified and presented one witness. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through K were admitted without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on May 31, 
2012. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
At hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Lebanon, Syria, and Saudi Arabia. The administrative notice 
summary regarding these countries is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 
with the attached documents. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old computer analyst, originally from Syria. When he was 
16 years old, he moved with his family to Lebanon (his mother’s place of birth). He is 
employed by a defense contractor that frequently works on projects for the federal 
government, requiring access to classified information. Applicant completed his 
undergraduate education in Lebanon. He immigrated to the United States in 2000 to 
attend graduate school. Applicant worked for his former employer, who sponsored 
Applicant’s work visa and citizenship application, since September 2000. He became a 
naturalized citizen of the United States in 2010. (GE 1) He has been employed with a 
new company since January 2012. (Tr. 34) 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. A retired housewife, she 
supports herself using the proceeds of her pension and the money left to her by her 
deceased husband. She has been living with Applicant in his home for approximately 
six or seven months. Applicant applied for a green card for his mother so that she may 
become a permanent resident of the United States. She is awaiting an interview to 
begin the process of U.S. citizenship. (AE E) Applicant advised her to renounce her 
Lebanese citizenship. She does not rely on Applicant for financial support. When 
Applicant’s mother is in Lebanon, he maintains contact with his mother weekly, by 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 
3 
 
telephone. Applicant visited his mother in Lebanon in 2008 and 2009 for family 
celebrations.  
  
 Applicant has two sisters who are dual citizens of Lebanon and Syria. He 
maintains contact with his sisters by telephone once a month and by email perhaps 
once a week. One sister is a Lebanese citizen with Swedish and Syrian citizenship. 
Both sisters were born in Syria. Syrian citizens by birth are Syrian citizens forever. One 
sister married a Swedish man of Lebanese descent. She is divorced, and when she 
remarried, she moved to Saudi Arabia, where her husband works for a company with 
strong ties to the United States. She and her husband live in an American compound in 
Saudi Arabia. (GE 2) Applicant’s second sister, R, is a citizen of both Lebanon and 
Syria. She resides in Qatar, Doha. She is married to a Lebanese man. She works at 
home. (Tr. 39) Applicant saw his sisters in 2009 in Lebanon for a wedding (Tr. 66) 
 
 In 1993, when Applicant’s father died, he bequeathed to Applicant, his two 
sisters, and their mother, ownership of a two-level house with storage, shops and 
warehouses underneath that in 2010, Applicant believed to be valued at $90,000. (GE 
2) However, Applicant submitted information that the Syrian government took the 
property by force, and rented it to the Department of Public Works. Applicant believes 
the rent is about $40 a month. His mother made one attempt years ago to collect the 
rent, but was unable to do so. Applicant has not seen the property in 14 years, but 
current news reports reveal that the city where the property is located has been under 
attack for more than 14 months. The news report dated May 9, 2012, stated that not a 
single building seems to have escaped the government’s ferocious assault. (AE H).  
Applicant is not sure given the violence in the area that the house is still standing. Many 
neighborhoods are desolate and destroyed. “Large areas of the city lie in ruins, a 
chilling testament to the indiscriminate violence unleashed by the government against 
the opposition strongholds”. (AE I) Applicant believes that the property has little value. 
People are fleeing the country and no one is interested in buying any property. (Tr. 43) 
Applicant has no interest in the property.  
 
 In February 2008, Applicant married his wife, a permanent resident of the United 
States, who is originally from Saudi Arabia. (AE C) Applicant and his wife have a 4-
month-old son, who is a U.S. citizen by birth. (AE D) Applicant has no intention of 
obtaining (dual) citizenship for his child. Applicant’s wife and his in-laws are dual 
citizens of Canada and Lebanon. Applicant’s parents-in-law and four sisters-in-law are 
dual citizens of Canada and Lebanon. They have lived in Canada for about 20 years.  
Applicant and his wife visit her family in Canada every year. Applicant always reports 
his contacts with foreign family members to his facility security officer. 
 
 In the years Applicant has lived in the United States, he has accumulated more 
than $600,000 assets, including his home and investment property.  He has no income 
from the property in Syria. He has established a home for his wife and son. He has no 
intention of returning to Syria or to Lebanon. There is no evidence that Applicant has 
revealed to any family members the nature of his work or about applying for a security 
clearance.  
 
 
4 
 
 Before submitting his application for security clearance, Applicant’s facility 
security officer, (FSO) vetted him carefully. Given the specialized and sensitive nature 
of the firm’s work, the firm has developed a strong security culture.  The FSO, who is an 
executive assistant to the company, testified at the hearing on Applicant’s behalf. 
Applicant and the FSO have known each other for approximately nine years. (Tr. 20) 
She described Applicant as a compassionate, driven, honest, and forthcoming 
individual. She knows from discussions with Applicant that he has no desire to return to 
Syria, his place of birth. When he became a U.S. citizen, Applicant invalidated his 
Syrian passport by cutting off the corners in his FSO’s presence. (Tr. 23) The FSO 
advised Applicant not to directly return the passport to the Syrian Embassy for fear of 
being flagged for possible espionage. (Tr. 24)   
  
 The FSO stated that Applicant has followed the rules and regulations of the 
National Industrial Security Program and its reporting requirements. She also attests 
that Applicant has been appropriately trained and briefed on his security duties and that 
he is keenly aware of the responsibilities that accompany holding a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor describes him as a person who plays a key role in 
shaping the company’s information technology offerings for federal government 
customers. Applicant’s work is of exceptional quality. He has made significant 
contributions to the company and customers by developing new solutions, architectures 
and supporting vendor partnerships. Applicant’s supervisor describes him as having 
exceptional character. He consistently meets his commitments and conducts himself 
forthrightly. (AE K)  
 
Lebanon 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy in which people have the constitutional 
right to change their government. Due to civil war the exercise of political rights were 
precluded until 1992. During the period 1992 to 2005, post-war reconstruction in 
Lebanon has included social and political instability, economic uncertainty, problems 
with basic infrastructure, and clashes between Israeli military forces and Hezbollah. The 
foreign policy of Lebanon reflects its geographic location, the composition of its 
population, and its reliance on commerce and trade. Its foreign policy is heavily 
influenced by neighboring Syria, which has also long influenced Lebanon’s internal 
policies as well. Lebanon, like most Arab states, does not recognize Israel, with which it 
has been technically at war since Israel’s establishment. 
 
Lebanon has had some human-rights problems including the arbitrary arrest and 
detainment of individuals and instances of arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of life, 
torture, and other abuses.  
 
Syria maintained troops in Lebanon from 1976 until 2005. Even though Syria 
withdrew its military forces from Lebanon in April 2006, it maintains a covert intelligence 
presence in Lebanon and offers support for and smuggles arms to Hezbollah and 
Palestinian terrorist groups operating in Lebanon. The Lebanese government’s inability 
to exercise authoritative control in the Hezbollah-dominated south of Lebanon and 
 
5 
 
inside Palestinian-controlled refugee camps enables terrorists to operate freely in 
Lebanon. Hezbollah’s continued attacks on Israel continue to create instability in the 
region. 
 
On May 9, 2008, the Secretary of State condemned the use of violence by 
illegitimate armed groups in Lebanon, and stated the legitimate authority of the 
Lebanese government and the institutions of the Lebanese state were being 
undermined by Hezbollah and its allies, backed by Syria and Iran.  On August 13, 2008, 
the States Department issued a condemnation of a terror attack in Lebanon, and on 
September 10, 2008, its issued a condemnation of a car bomb attack that killed a 
ranking official of a Lebanese political party. 
 
U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws that 
impose special obligations on them as Lebanese citizens. Presently, there is a travel 
warning for U.S. citizens traveling to Lebanon due to the threat against westerners.    
 
Syria  
 
Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime. Syria is designated by the U.S. 
Department of State as State Sponsor of Terrorism. Syria provides safe haven as well 
as political support to a number of designated Palestinian terrorist groups. The 
operational leadership of many of these groups is headquartered or sheltered in Syria, 
and the Syrian government allows such groups to receive and ship goods, including 
weapons, in and out of the country. It also provides diplomatic, political and material 
support to Hezbollah in Lebanon and allows Iran to supply this organization with 
weapons. Syria has maintained its ties with its strategic ally, and fellow state sponsor of 
terrorism, Iran. 
 
President Obama has continued the national emergency designation concerning 
Syria’s government in supporting terrorism, continuing occupation of Lebanon and 
international efforts with respect to the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq. These 
actions constituted an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign 
policy, and economy of the United Sates. 
 
Dual citizens and U.S. citizens of Syrian origin may be subject to compulsory 
military service in Syria, unless they receive a temporary or permanent exemption from 
such service prior to their entry into Syria. The Syrian government conducts intense 
physical and electronic surveillance of both Syrian citizens and foreign visitors. U.S. 
citizens visiting Syria should be aware that any encounter with a Syrian citizen would be 
subject to scrutiny by the General Intelligence Directorate (GID) or other security 
services. 
 
On December 21, 2011, the Office of the White House Press Secretary issued a 
statement that the United States is deeply disturbed by credible reports that the Assad 
regime continues to indiscriminately kill scores of civilians and army defectors, while 
destroying home and shops and arresting protestors without due process.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Saudi Arabia 
 
 The central institution of the Saudi Arabian Government is the monarchy ruled by 
the Al Saud family and a king chosen by and from the family; the king rules through 
royal decrees. Islamic law is the basis of the authority of the country’s conservative 
customs and social practices. Despite generally good relations, the United States 
remains concerned about human rights conditions in Saudi Arabia. The Unites States 
and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about regional security, oil exports and 
imports, and sustainable development. However, Saudi Arabia’s relations with the 
United States were strained after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. 
 
 During 2003 and 2004, terrorists and suicide bombers have kidnapped or killed 
Americans and have attacked the U.S. consulate in Jeddah, killing five consulate 
employees. A travel warning is in effect for Saudi Arabia due to concerns about the 
possibility of terrorist activity directed against American citizens and interests. 
Individuals and organizations based in Saudi Arabia have been designated by the U.S. 
Government as providing financial and material support to Al-Queda and other terrorist 
groups. Saudi and U.S. officials appear confident that Al-Queda’s capability to launch 
attacks inside the kingdom has been seriously degraded. The Saudi government 
continues to build its counterterrorism capacity and efforts to counter extremist ideology. 
On March 24, 2010, Saudi officials announced that since November 2009, the Saudi 
government has arrested more than 100 Al-Queda suspects accused of planning 
attacks against the government and oil installations. On November 26, 2010, Saudi 
officials announced that 149 Al-Queda suspects had been arrested since April; the 
suspects were planning to poison Saudi officials and journalists and to finance 
operations by robbing banks and companies. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
8 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
 Each of these disqualifying conditions applies.  Applicant’s wife is a dual citizen 
of Canada and Lebanon. His in-laws are dual citizens of Canada and Lebanon. 
Applicant’s four sisters-in-law are dual citizens of Canada and Lebanon. Applicant’s 
mother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. Applicant’s two sisters are citizens of 
Lebanon. One sister lives in Lebanon and the other in Saudi Arabia.  Applicant and his 
wife maintain close relationships with family members. The mere possession of close 
ties with family members living in these countries is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying 
under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship with even one 
relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for 
foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The countries in question also must be considered. In particular, the nature of 
their government, their relationships with the United States, and their human rights 
records are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant's family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. Applicant’s mother and sisters are citizens and 
residents of Lebanon, a country with historically good relations with the United States, 
but also one occupied by terrorist groups and credited with a poor human rights record.  
Applicant holds a property interest in a piece of commercial real estate that also 
increases his ties to the country of Syria, and provides another potential source of 
vulnerability. Accordingly, I find a heightened risk exists with respect to Applicant’s 
relationships with foreign family members and foreign financial interests.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could mitigate the foreign influence 
concerns under AG ¶ 8. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
 
9 
 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b) applies. Family contacts and ties with persons in a 
foreign country are not automatically disqualifying, but require an applicant to present 
evidence in mitigation and extenuation that he qualifies for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s relationships with his foreign family members cannot be 
considered casual or infrequent; however, none of Applicant’s family members are 
associated with or dependent on the governments of the countries at issue. It still could 
be unlikely that he would be put in the position of having to choose between the 
interests of his foreign relatives and the interests of the United States.  
 
Applicant was born in Syria and left at age 16. He lived in Lebanon with his 
mother. He did not develop strong ties to either Syria or Lebanon during his time in 
either country. He has no intention to return to either country as he has become quite 
successful in the United States. He is a homeowner and a new father. He wants to 
pursue his chosen career in the field of information technology. He has received an 
endorsement from his former FSO. 
 
Applicant’s wife holds dual citizenship with Canada and Lebanon. She is a 
permanent resident of the United States and intends to become a U.S. citizen. Her 
parents have lived in Canada for more than 20 years. They have no close ties with 
Lebanon. 
 
Applicant’s mother is applying for permanent residence in the United States and 
is awaiting her visa interview. She will apply for U.S. citizenship once eligible. 
Applicant’s one sister lives in Saudi Arabia with her husband who is working for a large 
company. They live in an American compound. Applicant has no significant ties with 
Saudi Arabia.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 2000. He is a loyal U.S. citizen. He 
has amassed significant financial assets in the United States. Although his interest in 
the Syrian property is not insignificant, it is not material to his overall net worth. The 
property does not provide a consistent source of income that is relied on by Applicant, 
his mother, or his sisters. Also, the property may not have much value due to the 
ongoing conflict in Syria.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 Some circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis. His 
mother, sisters, wife, and his in-laws are citizens of Lebanon. Applicant has strong ties 
of affection and or obligation to his mother and family. His family could be vulnerable to 
coercion or exploitation by a foreign power or terrorist organization doing business in 
Lebanon. Additionally, Applicant inherited property in Syria upon the death of his father. 
 
 On the other hand, Applicant credibly asserted his loyalty to the United States 
and his desire to help the United States. Applicant lived in Lebanon with his mother 
because he was a minor under the control of his parent. He attended undergraduate 
school in Lebanon, but moved to the United States to continue his education and to 
pursue a career. He is married and has a son who is a U.S. citizen. His mother plans to 
become a U.S. citizen. His in-laws live in Canada and have no apparent connection with 
Lebanon. The property in Syria is of no significance to Applicant. He is not even sure 
the property is still standing due to the ongoing conflict in the region.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, as well as the 
whole-person factors, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a mature, forthright, and educated man. His testimony was candid and well-
prepared. He came to this country in 2000 from Lebanon and became a citizen in 2010. 
He obtained a graduate degree and has been successful in the information technology 
field. Applicant has deep-rooted relationships in the United States. He has built a life 
with his wife and son in the United States.  These relationships root Applicant to the 
United States in a way that leads me to the conclusion that Applicant can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
 Applicant has complied with agency requirements for reporting travel and 
contacts overseas. He has visited Lebanon on two occasions for family celebrations. 
When his mother becomes a U.S. citizen and resides permanently in the United States, 
Applicant has no reason to return to Lebanon. He is adamant that he would not go to 
Syria. He wants to pursue his chosen career in the United States. Applicant’s sister lives 
in Saudi Arabia in an American compound. He has no connection to Saudi Arabia.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). I have incorporated my comments 
into the analysis of the applicable mitigating conditions above. The evidence supports a 
finding that Applicant does not have divided loyalties between the United States, 
 
11 
 
Lebanon, Syria, or Saudi Arabia. Based on the evidence, I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated the Guideline B concerns raised in this case. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.g:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility to classified 
information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
