 Applicant had the assistance of legal counsel in preparation for the hearing, but she elected to represent1
herself during the hearing. Tr. 14–21. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 11-03809
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  1
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a
security clearance. She is unable to mitigate the foreign preference security concern
stemming from her ongoing exercise of Iranian citizenship by possession of a current
Iranian passport. Likewise, she is unable to mitigate the foreign influence security
concern stemming from her relatively strong family ties to Iran. Accordingly, this case is
decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,2
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 The Directive, by mutual agreement, extends to other federal agencies, including the State Department.3
 ¶ 2-104 of the NISPOM (Feb. 2006).  4
 Exhibits D-1, D-2, and D-3. 5
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on or about2
November 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant
a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.
The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the
security guidelines known as Guideline C for foreign preference and Guideline B for
foreign influence.   
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The hearing took
place on May 1, 2012. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 9, 2012.  
Findings of Fact
The gravamen of the SOR is as follows: (1) under Guideline C, Applicant is
subject to a foreign preference security concern because she exercised and benefitted
from her Iranian citizenship by possession of a current Iranian passport after becoming
a U.S. citizen; and (2) under Guideline B, Applicant is subject to a foreign influence
security concern because of her family ties to Iran, including traveling to Iran in 2003,
2005, and 2008 to visit relatives. In her answer to the SOR, she admitted the factual
allegations except those in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.f. Her admissions are accepted and
adopted and incorporated herein as findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of
fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 56-year-old senior management official of a privately-held firm,
which has a facility clearance for its work with the State Department.  As a senior3
management official, she is required to have a security clearance at the same level as
the firm’s facility clearance.  She is a highly accomplished professional and executive4
with decades of experience in her field.  5
Applicant is a native-born citizen of Iran. She came to the United States in 1978
to pursue a master’s degree, which she completed in 1979. She intended to return to
Iran after completing her degree, but events in Iran at the time intervened. Her father
 Tr. 111–112. 6
 Exhibit 2. 7
 Tr. 76. 8
 Tr. 125–126. 9
 Exhibit 2. 10
 Tr. 66-67. 11
 Tr. 157–167. 12
3
sent the rest of her immediate family to the United States in 1978, but he was unable to
depart until 1980 or 1981. She has been employed by the same firm since 1983, which
is the same year she married her husband. He is also a dual-citizen of the United States
and Iran, and he is employed as a high-level engineer for another company. They have
lived at the same address since 1985. She became a U.S. citizen via the naturalization
process in 2003.
Applicant has held an Iranian passport since her immigration to the United States
in 1978. Until becoming a U.S. citizen in 2003, it was her only passport and she used it
for any foreign travel. This included her first trip back to Iran in 1990. Since obtaining
U.S. citizenship, she used her U.S. passport for all foreign travel except for her travel to
Iran. She used her Iranian passport to travel there in 2003 for a family visit, in 2005
when her father-in-law passed away, and in 2008 when a brother-in-law was seriously
ill. Her husband traveled to Iran by himself in 2009 for his brother’s funeral. She intends
to travel to Iran in the future.  She is now in possession of a current Iranian passport,6
which was issued to her in 2008.  She and her husband have Iranian passports to7
facilitate their travel to Iran to visit family and relatives.  She intends to retain her current8
Iranian passport,  and she intends to renew it when it expires in 2013.   9 10
At the hearing, Applicant stated her fundamental disagreement with and non-
support of the current government of Iran. She considers her allegiance to be solely with
the United States. To that end, she offered to give her Iranian passport to the firm’s
facility security officer (FSO).  She agreed that the FSO would retain custody of the11
passport, and she would only take possession of it for compassionate reasons, such as
a serious illness or death of a family member in Iran. The FSO confirmed this offer, and
stated that if Applicant took possession of the Iranian passport, he would comply with
security requirements by notifying the Government of that action.12
Applicant has several family members who are citizens of and residents in Iran,
which were alleged in the SOR. Her 90-year-old mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and
sister-in-law live in Iran. Applicant stated that none of them have any connection or
affiliation with the Iranian government, as her mother-in-law is elderly, her brother-in-law
is a small business owner, and her sister-in-law is a teacher. In addition, Applicant has a
number of extended relatives in Iran.     
 Appellate Exhibit I. 13
 Appellate Exhibit II at 9–13. 14
 Exhibits C-1 through C-9.  15
4
Concerning Applicant’s country of birth, both parties requested that I take
administrative or official notice of certain facts about Iran, and those requests were
granted. I took notice of the facts as set forth in Department Counsel’s written request,13
which are summarized or condensed to the following matters. The February 1979 fall of
the Shah of Iran, then a key U.S. ally, opened a long rift in relations between Iran and
the United States. On November 4, 1979, radical students seized the U.S. Embassy in
Tehran, and then held hostages until shortly after President Reagan’s inauguration on
January 20, 1981. The United States severed relations with Iran in 1980, and the two
countries have had no official dialogue since. In the United States, the Iranian Interest
Section is located in the Embassy of Pakistan. The U.S. protecting power in Iran is
Switzerland. The U.S. Government has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism,
and it has special concerns about four particular areas of Iranian behavior: (1) its efforts
to acquire weapons of mass destruction (e.g., its nuclear program); (2) its support of
and involvement with terrorism; (3) its support of violent opposition to the Middle East
peace process; and (4) its dismal record of human rights. Because Iran does not
recognize dual citizenship, Iranian-born-naturalized U.S. citizens are considered solely
Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, and they are required to enter and exit Iran using
an Iranian passport. When in Iran, they may be subject to surveillance, search,
harassment, arrest, and detention or imprisonment.     
I also took notice of the facts set forth in Applicant’s written request.  Those14
matters are summarized or condensed as follows: (1) the Iranian-American community
is a vital and integral element of the larger U.S. community; (2) in the United States,
there are about half a million people identifying themselves as Iranian-American; (3)
there are many notable Iranian-Americans who have made significant contributions in
the various fields; (4) Iranian-Americans tend to be well educated; (5) Iranian-Americans
have a high rate of business ownership and generate a high amount of business
income; and (6) more than 75 percent of Iranian-Americans have family currently living
in Iran, and they communicate regularly with family and friends in Iran.   
At the hearing, Applicant easily demonstrated that she is an intelligent, well-
spoken, and accomplished person. That was confirmed by favorable character
evidence,  which included testimony from the firm’s former CEO as well as her15
husband. The central point of all that information is that Applicant is highly regarded by
those who know her and work with her, and that she is a reliable and trustworthy person
who exercises good judgment. She made a cogent and organized presentation. She
was at times emotional when expressing herself and how the takeover of Iran by a
theocratic Islamic government has impacted her and her family. I found Applicant’s
testimony throughout the hearing was both sincere and credible.  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to16
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 24
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).25
5
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As16
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt17
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An18
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  19
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting20
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An21
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate22
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme23
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.24
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.25
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.26
 AG ¶¶ 9, 10, and 11 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).27
 ¶ AG 9. 28
6
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it26
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
In analyzing this case, I have considered several factors as most probative: (1)
Applicant is in possession of a current Iranian passport; (2) she has used that passport
for travel to Iran in 2003, 2005, and 2008 for family visits and she intends to travel there
in the future; (3) she intends to retain her current Iranian passport until it expires in
2013; (4) she intends to renew the Iranian passport upon expiration; (5) Applicant’s
husband is a dual-citizen of Iran and travels there using an Iranian passport; (6) in
addition to her husband, Applicant has relatively strong family ties to family in Iran; and
(7) Iran is ruled by an authoritarian government that is hostile to the United States. With
these in mind, it is appropriate to address the particular security guidelines. 
Under Guideline C for foreign preference,  the suitability the suitability of an27
applicant may be questioned or put into doubt due to an applicant’s foreign preference.
The overall concern under the guideline is:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.28
Given the evidence of Applicant’s ongoing exercise of Iranian citizenship by
possession of a current Iranian passport, the Government has established its case
under Guideline C. In reaching this conclusion, I considered the following disqualifying
condition: 
AG ¶ 10(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship
of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a
current foreign passport. 
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 29
7
The guideline also provides that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
foreign preference security concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions as
follows:
AG ¶ 11(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth
in a foreign country;
AG ¶ 11(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual
citizenship;
AG ¶11(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when
the individual was a minor;
AG ¶ 11(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority; 
AG ¶ 11(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated;
AG ¶ 11(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United
States Government.
None of these mitigating conditions, individually or in combination, apply in
Applicant’s favor. She is exercising her Iranian citizenship on a daily basis by
possession of an Iranian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2003. She used that
passport, and by doing so held herself out to Iranian authorities as an Iranian citizen,
when she traveled there in 2003, 2005, and 2008. Although her motivation to travel
there was benign (e.g., family visits), that does not change or alter the operative facts.
Moreover, she has no intention to rid herself of the Iranian passport, and she intends to
retain it, renew it, and use it in the future. Her proposal to have her firm’s FSO take
custody of the passport, unless she needs it for compassionate reasons, is not a viable
solution. Her proposal does not mitigate the security concern because it is conditional in
nature, it is a situation that she would effectively control, and she would in a practical
sense still have possession (not actual, but constructive) of the Iranian passport. No
mitigation is available under these circumstances. 
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be29
questioned or put into doubt due to an applicant’s foreign connections and interests.
The overall concern under the guideline is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
 AG ¶ 6. 30
8
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.30
Given the evidence of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is hostile to
the United States, the Government has established its case under Guideline B. In
reaching this conclusion, I considered the following disqualifying condition: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
The guideline also provides that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
foreign influence security concern. Given the evidence, I have considered the following
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant has all the indicators of a mature, stable, responsible, and trustworthy
person. She was articulate, serious, and credible at the hearing. Nevertheless, Iran’s
hostility to the United States and the heightened risk it creates place a heavy burden on
Applicant to show her family ties to Iran are mitigated. On this point, she has relatively
strong ties to family members in Iran. The best evidence on this point is her travel to
Iran (2003, 2005, and 2008), which shows the strength of her family ties. But she has
also lived in the United States for more than 30 years, which is nearly all of her adult life
and all of her working life. She has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for nearly ten years.
She has not previously worked in the defense industry or held a security clearance. She
is married to a dual citizen of Iran. Considering the evidence as a whole, including her
 ISCR Case No. 11-01888 (App. Bd. Jun. 1, 2012). 31
 See e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-12471 at 8–10 (AJ Foreman May 30, 2008) (reviewing  Appeal Board caselaw32
involving Iranian-American applicants under the previous and current AG).
 ISCR Case No. 11-03503 (AJ Leonard Feb. 10, 2012).  33
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).34
9
intent to travel to Iran in the future and the risks associated with that travel, I cannot
conclude that it is unlikely that she will be placed in a position of compromise or conflict
in a security clearance context. The situation in Iran is too uncertain and unstable and
risky to reach that conclusion. 
In deciding this case, I acknowledge that Applicant has a heavy burden to meet
as an Iranian-American who holds an Iranian passport. For example, the Appeal Board
recently reversed a favorable decision in a Guideline B and C case involving an Iranian-
American who gave an Iranian passport to an FSO, attempted to retrieve it without
success, obtained another Iranian passport, and then used that passport to travel to
Iran, albeit for a benign purpose.  That decision was consistent with a long line of31
Appeal Board caselaw involving Iranian-American applicants.  But an Iranian-American32
does not have an impossible or insurmountable burden to meet in a security clearance
case. A few months ago I decided a Guideline B case for an Iranian-American applicant,
and that case was not appealed.  In that case the most probative facts were that the33
applicant did not possess a current Iranian passport, had lived in the United States for
more than 30 years, had held a security clearance for 20 years, had not traveled to Iran
since departing in 1979, and had no intention of traveling to Iran in the future. I see that
case as factually distinguishable from Applicant’s case. All in all, both the facts and
caselaw militate against a favorable decision for Applicant. 
 
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, the evidence leaves me with
doubt about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. In reaching this conclusion, I
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Indeed, Applicant presented a good deal of
evidence that is quite favorable. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person
concept.  Having done so, I conclude that Applicant has not met her ultimate burden of34
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b: Against Applicant
 The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.e both concern Applicant’s interest in real estate in Iran. Based on35
Applicant’s testimony and documentary evidence (Exhibits B and B-1) showing that the Iranian government
effectively confiscated the real estate, I am persuaded that Applicant has little if any ownership interest
remaining in the real estate. W hatever does remain is mitigated because its value is not substantial—indeed,
it is likely quite minimal—compared with the value of financial interests held by Applicant and her husband in
the United States. Accordingly, these two allegations are decided for Applicant and will not be discussed
further.     
 Id.36
10
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant35
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: For Applicant36
Subparagraph 2.f: Withdrawn
Subparagraph 2.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
