1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:   ) 
     ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 11-03637 
    ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 7, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
interrogatories to Applicant to explain potentially disqualifying information in his 
background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant's 
responses to the interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated March 16, 2012, detailing security concerns for financial considerations. 
These actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective in 
2 
 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006 (AG). Applicant acknowledged 
receipt of the SOR on March 29, 2012. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 9, 2012, admitting seven and denying 
seven allegations under Guideline F of the AG. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on May 29, 2012, and the case was assigned to me on June 11, 2012. 
Department counsel received information that Applicant was about to be deployed 
overseas and an expedited hearing for his security clearance was required. On May 29, 
2012, Department Counsel notified Applicant by e-mail that an administrative judge was 
assigned to his case and would schedule a hearing by video tele-conference on June 
14, 2012. (Hearing Exhibit I) DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 11, 2012, 
scheduling the hearing for June 14, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered four exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 4. Applicant testified, and 
offered 14 exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as 
Applicant Exhibits A through N. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
June 21, 2012. Applicant waived the requirement for 15 days notice of a hearing (Tr. 5-
7) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 33 years old and has been a helicopter mechanic for a defense 
contractor since October 2010. He served in the Army from August 20, 1997, until 
August 2003. During his Army tour, he served overseas in Bosnia and Korea. He 
received an honorable discharge. He also served for 18 months in the Air Force 
Reserve, and again received an honorable discharge. He enlisted in the Navy Reserve 
and received an enlistment bonus. He was unable to meet his service obligations which 
resulted in the debt at SOR 1.a. Applicant first married in March 1998 and divorced in 
March 2008. He had two children from this marriage for whom he is required to pay 
child support. One of the children now lives with him and his present wife. He married 
again in May 2010 and has one child from this marriage. He is a high school graduate 
with some technical courses taken in the military. (Tr. 36-40; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated 
October 7, 2010)  
 
After leaving the Army, Applicant and his first wife had family issues and they 
separated. Applicant had difficulty finding good steady employment. He was being laid 
off or his hours were cut in his many jobs. His job history on the security clearance 
application shows sporadic jobs in various locations since 2003. He worked as a 
refrigeration service technician, assistant manager at an auto parts store, warehouse 
worker, pest control technician, waste water plant operator, taxi driver, and aircraft 
mechanic. He was only able to meet his basic financial obligations of paying rent and 
providing food for his family. (Tr. 40-42, 45-51; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated October 7, 
2010) 
 
3 
 
Appellant’s monthly budget reflects that his monthly net income is $2,500, with 
monthly expenses of $3,278. Included in the expenses are $600 for child support and 
$272 for medical expenses. Applicant’s wife has medical problems that require 
extensive medications, and prevent her from working. She has applied for Social 
Security disability. (App. Ex. N, Letter, dated June 5, 2012) His son has some medical 
and developmental issues that also caused increased medical expenses. (App. Ex. M, 
Medical Records, dated April 4, 2012) Most of the family medical expenses are paid by 
health insurance. But there are additional expenses for co-pays or what health 
insurance does not pay. The extra child support payment and the medical expenses are 
a significant cause of his monthly expenses being more than his income. (Tr. 46-47) 
 
Applicant’s expenses exceed his monthly income by $738. Applicant and his wife 
have managed to pay current debts by overdrafts of their accounts by about $300 to 
$400 monthly. They have also pawned some items and sold other household goods. He 
has been able to pay and stay current with the rent and utilities. He included copies of 
the bills that he pays including his rent and utilities. He has one credit card but he does 
not know the balance on the card. (Tr. 15-20, 43-45, 50-51; App. Ex. A, Monthly Budget, 
undated; App. Ex. B, Pay Stub, dated May 27, 2012; App. Ex. C, Lease and Payment, 
dated June 2, 2012; App. Ex. D, Payment Receipts, dated May 31, 2012; App. Ex. L, 
Medical Insurance Statement, dated June 1, 2012) 
 
Applicant also listed the status of his debts. Four debts are shown as paid, two 
as being paid, and eight as not being paid. Applicant has not been able to address 
these debts due to a lack of income. When he has the income, he will pay them. (Tr. 18-
21; App. Ex. E, Creditor List, undated) Child support payments of $600 are taken 
directly from Applicant’s pay. Since one of his children is now living with him, his child 
support payments should be reduced to $300. He has not contacted the state agency 
responsible for child support to have the payments reduced. (Tr. 37-38) 
 
Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 3, dated February 1, 2012; and Gov. Ex. 4, dated 
November 2, 2010), and Applicant’s answers to an interrogatory (Gov. Ex. 2, dated 
January 24, 2012), show the following delinquent debts: a $15,183 debt in collection for 
the Defense Finance and Accounting Agency (SOR 1.a); a credit card debt in collection 
for $2,094 (SOR 1.b); a credit card debt in collection of $523 (SOR 1.c); child support 
payments in collection for $6,787 (SOR 1.d); student loans in collection for $4,821 (SOR 
1.e); an apartment rent in collection for $3,874 (SOR 1.f); a credit card debt in collection 
for $434 (SOR 1.g); a car  loan debt in collection for $4,404 (SOR 1.h); a telephone debt 
in collection for $161 (SOR 1.i); a credit card debt in collection for $1,184 (SOR 1.j); a 
medical debt in collection for $100 (SOR 1.k); a cable bill in collection for $194 (SOR 
1.l); a medical account in collection for $313 (SOR 1.m); and a medical account in 
collection for $235 (SOR 1.n). The total debt is approximately $40,000. 
 
Applicant admits the debt to the Defense Finance and Account Office at SOR 
1.a. He incurred this debt when he enlisted in the Navy Reserve and received a bonus 
because he did not require training. He was unable to fulfill his commitment to the Navy 
Reserve because of work and family issues so he resigned. He has to pay the bonus 
back because he did not meet his commitment. (Tr. 39-41) 
 
4 
 
The debt at SOR 1.b is listed on his credit report as a $0 balance. Applicant 
believes it has been paid, but he did not have a receipt for a payment. (Tr. 20-22; App. 
Ex. F, Credit report, undated) He has not made any payments on the debt at SOR 1.c. 
(Tr. 32) 
 
The debt for child support arrears at SOR 1.d, and the student loans at SOR 1.e 
have been paid by his tax refund being garnished for the payments. (Tr. 22-24; App. Ex. 
G, IRS Letter, dated February 21, 2012; App. Ex. H, Student Loan Paid in Full Letter, 
dated April 16, 2012) 
 
Applicant has not paid the apartment rent debt at SOR 1.f. Applicant and his wife 
separated. He moved from the state but his wife stayed in their apartment. She moved a 
few months later without paying the rent or telling him of her move. He tried to talk to the 
apartment agent to dispute the debt but he has not been able to contact them. His 
attempts to contact the agent have been by telephone and not by letter or by any other 
documents. (Tr. 33-34) 
 
Applicant started to make payments on the credit card debt at SOR 1.g. 
However, he has not had the income to continue making payments and he has not 
made a payment recently. (Tr. 25-26, 33-34; App. Ex. I, Money Order, dated November 
18, 2011) Applicant has not been able to make payments on the debts at SOR 1.h, and 
SOR 1.i. (Tr. 27-34) He is not aware of the debt listed at SOR 1.j, and does not know 
the company listed as the creditor in the credit report. He has not paid the debt at SOR 
1.k because of a lack of funds. (Tr. 27, 34-35) 
 
Applicant stated that he paid the cable bill at SOR 1.l. He has a statement from 
the cable company that shows his current balance as $0. (Tr. 26-27, 35) Applicant has 
not made any payments on the medical debts at SOR 1.m and 1.n. (Tr. 35-36) 
 
Applicant presented letters of recommendation from his employer. A retired 
military member and a pilot for the company wrote that Applicant is a superior helicopter 
mechanic. He is hard-working, reliable, and a problem solver. Applicant is trustworthy, 
honorable, motivated, and highly intelligent. He has impressed others with his candor, 
clarity of vision, and ethical attitudes and practices. The writer recommends that 
Applicant be granted eligibility for access to classified information. (App. Ex. K, Letter, 
dated May 30, 2012)  
 
The maintenance supervisor for his company wrote that Applicant has worked for 
him for almost two years. Applicant has not had any disciplinary problems, and is a 
tireless worker. He recommends that Applicant be granted access to classified 
information. (App. Ex. K, Letter, undated) 
 
A co-worker wrote that he has known Applicant for about two years. Applicant is 
a model employee who maintains the utmost professionalism. He is the company’s go-
to-mechanic. He is trustworthy and has good character traits. He recommends that 
Applicant be granted access to classified information. (App. Ex. K, Letter, dated June 4, 
2012) 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
6 
 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debts established by credit reports and Applicant’s 
admissions raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations); and AG ¶ 19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis). Applicant incurred delinquent debt through 
low employment, job changes, his wife’s medical condition preventing her from working, 
family medical expenses, and extra child support payments. His monthly expenses far 
exceed his monthly income. The evidence indicates an inability and not an 
unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions 
that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). 
These mitigating conditions only partially apply.  
 
Applicant’s employment history shows that since he left the Army in 2003, he had 
many job changes and frequent moves to gain better employment. He and his first wife 
separated and divorced causing increased financial issues of housing and child support. 
His present wife has an illness that increases their medical expenses and prevents her 
from working. His son has a disability causing increased medical costs. These issues 
are unusual and beyond his control. These issues are ongoing and will continue to 
cause financial problems. In addition, Applicant has not acted responsibly towards his 
finances. While some of the debts were paid, most of the payments were due to the IRS 
using tax refunds to pay the debts. Applicant has little disposable income to use himself 
for debt reduction. Of greater concern is that he is living beyond his means. His monthly 
expenses exceed his income by $736. He could lower his expenses by reducing his 
child support payments but he has not taken the necessary steps to do so.  
 
I considered AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For AG ¶ 20(d) to apply, there must 
be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a good-faith 
effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
7 
 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts 
is needed. Applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment. A 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual 
debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. An applicant is not 
required to establish that he paid each and every debt listed. All that is required is that 
Applicant demonstrates an established plan to resolve his financial problems and shows 
he has taken significant actions to implement that plan. 
 
Applicant has not shown an established plan to pay and resolve his past 
delinquent debts. He has shown some significant payments on some debts in the last 
few years. However, the payments were made by the IRS using tax refunds. He is 
making some payments on two small debts on a monthly basis. However, he has no 
plans in place to pay most of his debts. He stated his intent to pay the debts when funds 
are available. A promise to pay debts in the future when his job conditions have 
improved is not a good-faith action showing reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation. His lack of a meaningful track record of paying 
delinquent debts, except by use of tax refunds, shows he is not being financially 
reasonable and prudent in adhering to his financial obligations. His past delinquent 
debts reflect adversely on his trustworthiness and good judgment.   
 
I also considered AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue). Applicant disputes some of the debts because he does not 
know about the debts or the creditors. He did not establish a reasonable attempt to 
contact the creditor or otherwise resolve the dispute. Based on all of the financial 
information available, to include the information provided by Applicant, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the opinions of 
Applicant’s supervisors and co-worker that he is an excellent employee who should be 
granted access to classified information. I considered his service in the Army and Air 
Force Reserves. I considered that Applicant has attempted to resolve his delinquent 
debts by always seeking better employment. I considered that Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control. His wife and son have 
medical issues that prevent his wife from working and cause additional medical 
expenses. However, he has not been responsible towards his finances. He has not 
been in contact with many of the creditors to resolve or settle the debts. He has not paid 
many of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. Some debts were paid by the IRS using 
tax refunds. He disputes some debts but he has not taken steps to resolve the disputes. 
 
Applicant has not established a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent 
debts. An intention to resolve debts in the future is not a good-faith effort. Of greater 
concern is that Applicant is living beyond his means. His monthly expenses far exceed 
his monthly income. Applicant has resorted to using overdrafts and pawning items to 
maintain some financial stability. Applicant’s inability to resolve his financial obligations 
and live within his means indicates that he may not be concerned, responsible, and 
careful regarding classified information. His failure or inability to live within his means, 
satisfy debts, or meet financial obligations is the exact financial circumstance that 
causes a security concern. It is the type of circumstance that indicates poor self-control 
or lack of judgment. It raises questions concerning his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. His living beyond his means and financial 
overextension show he may be at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security concerns arising from finances. His 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  
 Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.k:  Against Applicant 
9 
 
 Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.m – 1.n:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
