 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02567   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 15, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 16, 2012, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 2, 2012, scheduling the hearing for June 14, 
 
2 
 
2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on June 22, 2012.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
Applicant affirmatively waived his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days 
notice before the hearing. 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through J, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked AE K 
through O and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s correspondence 
forwarding AE K through O is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2010. He served in the U.S. military from 1993 until 
he was honorably discharged in 1999. He held a security clearance in the past, but it 
lapsed when he changed jobs. He attended college for a period but did not obtain a 
degree. He is married with three adult stepchildren and one minor stepchild.1 
  
 Applicant has had financial problems for a number of years. In the military, he 
was stationed in an area with a high cost of living, and he had difficulty paying his bills 
with his pay as a junior enlisted service member. He admitted that he lived beyond his 
means and became overextended on credit cards, which continued after his discharge 
from the military. He left a good-paying job in 2001 to move back home to care for his 
mother after she suffered an injury. He cosigned a car loan for a girlfriend. She did not 
maintain the payments on the loan after they broke up, and her car was repossessed. 
Applicant had about five other cars that were repossessed. He also lost his job in 2009. 
He had accessed a few social networking sites on his work computer. His employer 
stated it was a violation of company policy and offered him the option of resignation or 
termination. He chose resignation. He was unable to find full-time employment until 
2010.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling more than $45,000. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted owing all the debts in the SOR, with the 
exception of the $442 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. The name of the creditor for 
that debt is not identified in the SOR. The debt appears on a 2010 credit report without 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24, 63-65, 73; GE 1; AE G. 
 
2 Tr. at 24-27, 30-33, 36-39, 50-51; GE 1, 2.  
 
3 
 
naming a creditor. The debt is listed as opened in July 2004, with a date of last action of 
April 2004. The debt does not appear on later credit reports.3 
 
 Applicant did not have enough taxes withheld from his pay for a number of years, 
and he did not pay his tax liability when due. He had a $6,766 federal tax lien filed 
against him in August 2009. He entered into an installment agreement with the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) to pay $300 toward his back taxes. A June 2011 notice from the 
IRS confirmed the installment agreement. The notice indicated that Applicant’s 2006 
taxes had been paid. He owed in excess of $15,700 in taxes and penalties for tax years 
2007 and 2008. The amount owed in interest was not legible on the document.4   
 
 Applicant’s payments to the IRS left him unable to pay his other delinquent debts. 
When he received the SOR, he felt that his only option was to file bankruptcy. He filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 2012. Under Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured 
Claims, the petition listed $800 owed on a loan for a 2003 car. Under Schedule E, 
Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims, the petition listed $17,000 owed to the 
IRS. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition 
listed 21 debts totaling $50,797. Schedule I, Current Income of Individual Debtor(s), 
listed Applicant’s and his wife’s net monthly take home pay as $3,597. Under Schedule 
J, Current Expenditures of Individual Debtor(s), the petition listed Applicant’s average 
monthly expenses as $3,765. That figure includes $300 to the IRS and $50 toward 
Applicant’s student loan. When Applicant’s average monthly expenses are subtracted 
from his average monthly income, the remainder is negative $167.5 
 
 Applicant made some payments toward his delinquent debts, and he paid several 
debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He owed the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA) $159, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. He sent a $159 check to the VA in May 2011. There 
is no evidence that the check was honored. Applicant’s bank statement shows two $35 
nonsufficient funds (NSF) debits and two $35 overdraft fees shortly before and after the 
date on the check to the VA. The debt is listed on Applicant’s bankruptcy petition.6 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy. His 
wife is disabled. She is in a protracted custody battle over her child and is currently 
residing in the state where the child is located. Applicant has helped her with her legal 
costs and her living expenses. He testified that his finances are tight and that every 
dollar of his income “is accounted for somewhere.”7   
                                                          
3 Tr. at 33-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6; AE B-D, I. 
 
4 Tr. at 27, 40-41, 54-57, 66-67; GE 2-4. Applicant’s tax problems were not alleged in the SOR. Any debts 
that were not specifically alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. They may be 
considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
5 Tr. at 27-28, 40, 59-61, 69-71; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, F. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-48, 54, 59-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 54-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE F, H. 
 
4 
 
Applicant submitted a number of documents and letters attesting to his character 
and his excellent performance while in the military. He is praised as a hard-working 
family man who displays integrity, honor, professionalism, dependability, reliability, and 
honesty.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
8 AE E, G, H, J-O. 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant owes the $442 
unidentified medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. That allegation is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant was stationed in the military in an area with a high cost of living. He left 
a good-paying job in 2001 to care for his mother. His ex-girlfriend did not maintain the 
payments on the car loan he cosigned. He had periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. His wife is disabled and in a protracted custody battle over her child. 
These events constitute conditions that were beyond his control. To be fully applicable, 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant admitted that he lived beyond his means and overextended himself on 
credit cards. For several years, he did not have enough taxes withheld from his pay, 
and he did not pay his tax liability when due. Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy and 
received financial counseling as a requirement of the bankruptcy. His debts have not yet 
been discharged. Moreover, his bankruptcy petition shows that Applicant’s monthly 
expenses are more than his monthly income. 
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted completely responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts.9 His finances are not 
yet under control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable; the second 
section is not.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
9 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his honorable military 
service. Events beyond Applicant’s control had a significant effect on his finances, but 
some of his financial problems were of his own creation. His bankruptcy, even if 
granted, will not solve all his financial problems because his monthly expenses exceed 
his income.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
