1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-05287
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 9, 2010. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 7, 2011, detailing security
concerns under Guideline C, foreign preference. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
GE 1; Tr. 14-15.1
GE 1 - GE 2; AE A; AE D; Tr. 14.2
AE B; AE C; Tr. 15. 3
2
Applicant received the SOR on January 12, 2012, and he answered it on January
25, 2012. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received
the request, and Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 2, 2012. I
received the case assignment on May 1, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on
May 16, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 6, 2012. The
Government offered exhibits marked as GE 1 through GE 3, which were received and
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. He
submitted exhibits marked as AE A through AE D, which were received and admitted
into evidence without objection. The record closed on June 6, 2012. DOHA received the
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 14, 2012.
Procedural Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on May 31, 2012, less than 15 days before
the hearing. (Tr. 8.) I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to
receive the notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to
the 15-day notice. (Id.) 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations of the SOR. His
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 35 years old, works as an engineering technician for a
Department of Defense contractor. He began his current employment in March 2010.
Applicant has never served in the military.1
Applicant was born in Trinidad and Tobago, where he grew up. His father is a
citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, and his mother is a citizen of the United States, living in
Trinidad and Tobago. Applicant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago and the United
States,by birth, as is his sister. His sister currently attends school in Australia.2
Applicant migrated to the United States in 2002, where he has lived and worked
for the last 10 years. He is engaged to a United States citizen, and he attends college
part-time.3
GE 3; Tr. 19-20, 26-27. 4
GE 2, GE 3.5
Tr. 17-23, 26-28.6
Tr. 20-25.7
3
Applicant holds valid passports from the United States and Trinidad and Tobago.
He used his Trinidad and Tobago passport to travel to Trinidad and Tobago in 2007 and
in 2010. On his return trip, he used his United States passport. His Trinidad and Tobago
passport expired in April 2012. He is currently in the process of renewing this passport.4
Applicant met with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on
September 14, 2010 and October 12, 2010 to discuss his contacts with Trinidad and
Tobago. The OPM investigator noted in the first meeting that Applicant held a Trinidad
and Tobago passport as well as dual citizenship with Trinidad and Tobago and the
United States. Subsequent to this, in January 2011, Applicant’s facility security officer
(FSO) requested Applicant to surrender his Trinidad and Tobago passport, and he
declined. In his July 5, 2011 answers to interrogatories, Applicant again declined to
surrender or destroy his Trinidad and Tobago passport.5
At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged that his Trinidad and Tobago passport
expired in April 2012 and that he was in the process of completing the paperwork to
renew it. He stated that he did not intend to return, invalidate or destroy his Trinidad and
Tobago passport because he believed that giving up the passport equated to the
renunciation of his Trinidad and Tobago citizenship and his heritage. He further
explained that he needed to retain his Trinidad and Tobago because of his parents’
health. His parents are in their 60s and have health problems which may eventually
require him to return to Trinidad and Tobago. His Trinidad and Tobago passport allows
him to stay as long as his parents would need him, whereas a visitor’s visa would
require him to leave after three months. In addition, if he needed to stay for an indefinite
period of time, his Trinidad and Tobago passport would allow him to work in Trinidad
and Tobago.6
   
Applicant indicated that he can have a stamp placed on his U.S. passport which
shows that he is a Trinidad and Tobago citizen. He also stated that if this stamp allowed
him to work in Trinidad and Tobago, he would consider surrendering his Trinidad and
Tobago passport to his FSO. He is not willing relinquish his Trinidad and Tobago
passport and seek a Trinidad and Tobago equivalent of a green card for employment if
he needed to remain in Trinidad and Tobago to care for his parents because it took his
mother about eight years to get such a card in the 1970s. He was unaware of the
possibility of getting his Trinidad and Tobago approved by a cognizant security
authority.  7
Applicant does not own any property in Trinidad and Tobago. He closed the one
bank account he held in Trinidad and Tobago. He has note voted in elections or served
4
in the military. He does not receive any benefits from the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
5
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign
country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country;
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business
interests in another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;
and,
(7) voting in a foreign election;
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen;
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in conflict with the national security interest; and,
6
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.
Applicant has held an active Trinidad and Tobago for the last ten years. The
passport expired in April 2012, but Applicant is completing the papers needed to re-
activate this passport. He intends to maintain an active Trinidad and Tobago passport.
Applicant’s failure to surrender his foreign passport, when asked by his FSO, shows
allegiance to the country of his birth. The Government established it case under AG ¶¶
10(a)(1) and 10(d). 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the
individual was a minor;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority.
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and,
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States
Government.
I have considered all the above mitigating conditions and find that none apply.
Applicant is not willing to surrender his Trinidad and Tobago passport to his FSO nor is
he willing to renounce his Trinidad and Tobago citizenship. He has not received
approval from the cognizant security authority to hold his Trinidad and Tobago passport.
His use of his Trinidad and Tobago passport is his only exercise of his Trinidad and
Tobago citizenship, but it demonstrates an unacceptable foreign preference.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
holds dual citizenship with the United States and Trinidad and Tobago. He is not
required to by U.S. law to renounce his Trinidad and Tobago citizenship and is not being
asked to do so now. However, the exercise of any right of dual citizenship, such as
maintaining an active foreign passport, raises a security concern about whether he can
be counted on to act in the interests of the United States. Applicant continues to
possess an active U. S. passport that he could use for foreign travel, including to
Trinidad and Tobago. His Trinidad and Tobago passport expired two months ago, but
he intends to renew it and is in the process of completing the required paperwork. He
believes that if he does not maintain his Trinidad and Tobago passport, he will
automatically lose his citizenship. He did not provide any information which supports his
belief.
Applicant could ask the United States to place a stamp on his U.S. passport,
indicating that he is also a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago. He appears reluctant to do so
because he does not want to lose the citizenship of his birth country. Likewise, he does
not want to surrender his Trinidad and Tobago passport to his FSO, although giving the
passport to the FS0 would prevent him from using it and mitigate security concerns,
provided he does not request it. Applicant is adamant about maintaining his dual
citizenship and believes that he must retain his passport to do. Given his unwillingness
to comply with DoD requirements concerning the possession and use of a foreign
passport, he has not mitigated the Government’s security concerns about his foreign
preference.
8
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign preference
under Guideline C.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
