 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02512 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 14, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 3, 2012. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on April 6, 2012, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on April 25, 2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which 
were admitted into evidence. GE 3 was objected to by Applicant, but that objection was 
overruled. No other objections were made. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and did not submit any exhibits at 
the hearing. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted AE A, which was admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 3, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h. 
He denied ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2010. He is an aircraft loadmaster. He has an 
associate’s degree. He is married, with one adult child from a previous marriage and 
two adult stepchildren. His wife works as a real estate agent. He is not currently being 
paid by his employer. He served in the Air Force on active duty for 16 years and held a 
security clearance during that time. He received an honorable discharge. He does not 
currently hold a secret security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges a bankruptcy discharge in 1999, two mortgage foreclosures, 
and seven delinquent debts totaling about $24,303. The debts were listed on credit 
reports obtained on May 4, 2010, and October 4, 2011.2  
 
 Applicant stated that his divorce led to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999 (SOR ¶ 
1.a). As a result of the divorce proceedings, he incurred high attorney’s fees. These 
fees were ultimately discharged in bankruptcy. After he left the Air Force, he began 
working in the real estate business in 2001. From 2001 to 2005, he purchased several 
homes and then rented them. He used the rental income to purchase additional homes. 
In 2005 the real estate market collapsed and he was unable to sell the properties or to 
make the mortgage payments. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant thought he only had 
one property foreclosed; however, during his testimony he remembered that both a 
duplex (SOR ¶ 1.b) and a condominium (SOR ¶ 1.j) were foreclosed. The credit reports 
also show two different mortgages, for two different amounts, opened on two different 
dates, and to two different mortgage holders. I find that there were two separate 
mortgage foreclosures in 2008. Applicant did not supply any forgiveness of debt 
documentation for the foreclosed properties.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-7, 33, 36; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 5-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 26, 43-44, 67-68; GE 5-6, 8; Answer to SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of 
$14,000. Applicant admits he used the card to take cash advances to make mortgage 
payments. He contacted the creditor to negotiate a settlement, but was unable to do so. 
This debt is unresolved.4 
 
 Applicant denies the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d in the amount of $1,212. He 
claims that he has no knowledge of the debt, and he was overseas when the debt was 
listed on his credit report. He did not supply any documentation disputing the debt. The 
debt is listed on both credit reports as an installment debt. It was opened in December 
2009 and the last action on the account was in April 2010.5 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of 
$8,071. Applicant admitted he used the card to take cash advances to make mortgage 
payments. He contacted the creditor to negotiate a settlement, but was unable do so. 
This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 Applicant denies the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f in the amount of $74. He claims 
that he has no knowledge of the debt. He did not supply any documentation disputing 
the debt. The debt is listed on one credit report as a medical debt. It was opened in 
November 2007 and the last action on the account was in January 2008.7 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a delinquent utility debt in the amount of $257. 
Applicant claims in his testimony that the debt was from a rental property that the tenant 
was responsible for paying. He did not supply any documentation supporting this claim. 
In his SOR answer, he admitted this debt. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a delinquent debt in the amount of $61. 
Applicant admits that he hired a company to provide website management. This debt is 
unresolved.9 
 
 Applicant denies the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i in the amount of $628. He claims 
that he has no knowledge of the debt. He did not supply any documentation disputing 
the debt. The debt is listed on one credit report as a medical debt. It was opened in 
February 2009 and the last action on the account was in June 2007 (this appears to be 
an erroneous date). It is not listed on the most recent credit report.10 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 52-53; GE 8; Answer to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. at 54; GE 5-6, 8; Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. at 55; GE 8, Answer to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. at 57; GE 5, 8; Answer to SOR. 
 
8 Tr. at 58; Answer to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. at 59-60; Answer to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. at 60; GE 5-6; Answer to SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
 Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant is indebted to the IRS for unpaid 
taxes for years 2005-2007. He is currently paying about $340 monthly towards that 
debt. He currently owns a home that he believes has a market value of $600,000, and 
that has a mortgage of $280,000. His equity in this home is approximately $320,000. 
The only financial counseling he sought concerned whether he qualified for a loan 
modification.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 72-73; GE 8. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had a prior bankruptcy, two mortgage foreclosures, and he failed to 
pay the debts listed above. He was unable or unwilling to satisfy his obligations. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s foreclosed mortgages are recent and multiple. His other delinquent 
debts are ongoing and he has not made any payments toward those debts. His poor 
financial record and his lack of payment toward any of the debts cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant made conscious decisions to buy real estate as an investment strategy. 
When the real estate market crashed, he was unable to pay his obligations. It is 
unwarranted to now conclude that because the real estate market is down and he 
experienced some unforeseen costs with his investments, that these were conditions 
beyond his control. These are part of the risks inherent in this type of business 
investment. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 The only evidence of financial counseling is Applicant’s seeking information 
about loan modifications. Although AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies, ¶ 20(d) does not. He did 
not supply any documentation to support his disputed debts. I am giving him the benefit 
of the doubt concerning the debt at SOR ¶ 1.i because the credit report entry is 
confusing and that debt does not appear on the most recent credit report. Otherwise, ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s years of service to the Air Force. I also considered that 
he purposefully engaged in a real estate strategy that led to his financial problems. His 
past financial track record reflects a troublesome financial history that causes me to 
question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.j:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
