 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03409 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is paying his mortgage and paid one additional debt. However, several 
charged-off or collection accounts, which total more than $23,000, have yet to be 
addressed. He did not intentionally provide false answers on his security clearance 
questionnaire. He mitigated the personal conduct security concerns, but failed to rebut 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 5, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
  On November 1, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On March 15, 2012, I was assigned the case. On April 5, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on April 24, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 8, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as did his wife, and he submitted Exhibits 
A through O, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. On May 18, 2012, additional 
material was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which 
was admitted into the record as Ex. P. On May 1, 2012, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied being in debt for a home equity loan 
(SOR 1.e, $18,495), but admitted the remaining delinquent accounts. He neither 
admitted nor denied the personal conduct issues related to his answers on his June 
2010 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) related to being 
delinquent on his debts. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old process technician and inspector who has worked for a 
defense contractor since August 1969, and seeks to maintain a security clearance. (Tr. 
50) 
 
Applicant is a valuable part of the shop team who takes pride in his work. (Ex. D) 
He is professional, courteous, eager to help, and he is willing to go the “extra mile” to 
assist the customer. (Ex. E) His duty performance has resulted in letters of appreciation, 
favorable comments, and awards. (Ex. A − M) He routinely accumulates numerous 
hours of vacation time, which he is unable to take. (Tr. 51-52) 
 
Applicant acknowledges owing approximately $24,000 on nine charged-off or 
collection accounts. In June 2010, when he completed his e-QIP, he failed to indicate 
he was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debt or that he had been more 
than 180 days delinquent on any debt in the last seven years. Applicant’s wife handled 
the family’s finances. She does not discuss the family’s finances with Applicant because 
she does not want to burden him with it. (Tr. 45) He was unaware of any delinquencies 
when he completed his e-QIP.  
 
In August 2010, Applicant was asked about his delinquent accounts during a 
personal subject interview. (Ex. 6) At that time, he stated his wife handled the family’s 
finances and he was unaware of his financial situation. (Ex. 6) At that time, they had cut 
up their credit cards and were going to review their credit bureau reports (CBR). (Ex. 6) 
In May 2012, he was sent interrogatories asking about the specific SOR accounts. (Ex. 
5) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
In October 2000, Applicant obtained a $40,000 note with $642 monthly 
payments. As of February 2011, the note was $17,166 past due. (Ex. N) Applicant and 
the lender entered into a forbearance plan. In February 2011, he paid the $5,150 
required of the plan. He began making monthly payments of $1,725.63, which 
represented the $642 monthly installment plus an additional monthly payment of $1,092 
to address the arrearage. (Ex. N) He documented $1,724 monthly payments from April 
2011 through February 2012. (Ex. N) At the hearing, Applicant and his wife were both 
informed of the need to provide documentation establishing his delinquent debts were 
being addressed. (Tr. 31)  
 
Applicant’s annual income is approximately $78,000. (Tr. 48) For seven years, 
Applicant’s wife worked for an event planning company making approximately $400 per 
week. (tr. 37) She just started in a custom drapes business and hopes to make a couple 
of thousand dollars a month. (Tr. 38) In December 2008, they hired an attorney to assist 
their son, which cost them $7,000 to $8,000. (Tr. 37) Applicant’s home is worth $80,000 
and they owe approximately $7,400 on it. (Tr. 40) Applicant was hoping to get a pay-off 
quote on the balance due on the house so he could pay it with some money he had 
saved. (Tr. 41)  
 
Neither Applicant nor his wife have had financial counseling. (Tr. 44, 55) 
Applicant owns a 1981 pickup that is paid off, and he is current on his payments on a 
2006 van. (Tr. 49) He also just started making $500 monthly payments to the IRS to 
address $3,500 owed the IRS. (Tr. 49) He has no 401(k) retirement fund. (Tr. 53)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Charged-off account. 
 
 
$689 Not paid. Applicant asserts creditor 
agreed to settle the matter for $689 with 
the first payment of $159 to be made 
five weeks after the hearing. (Ex. P)  
b Collection account. 
 
 
 
$891 
 
Not paid. (Tr. 32) Applicant asserts 
creditor agreed to settle the matter for 
$818 with the first payment of $85 to be 
made five weeks after the hearing. (Ex. 
P) 
c Collection account. 
Applicant asserts, but 
failed to document, that 
this debt and the debt 
listed in SOR 1.g are the 
same obligation. (Ex. P) 
$2,600 
 
Unpaid. Creditor demanding immediate 
payment of half the debt. Applicant says 
he will contact the creditor again in 
August 2012. (Tr. 32)  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
d Collection account. 
 
 
$3,431 Not paid. Applicant asserted the 
collection service stated the debt was 
not the Applicant’s debt, but related to a 
deceased person. Applicant was told to 
contact the collection service again in 
one to two weeks. (Ex. P) No 
documentation of further contact by 
Applicant has been shown. 
e Home equity loan. 
 
 
$18,495 Paying. Applicant is in compliance with 
the February 2011 forbearance plan. 
(Ex. N)  
f Charged-off account.In 
June 2008, Applicant 
purchased a 2006 
Pontiac, which developed 
engine problems. (Tr. 34) 
$12,331 Unpaid. During the summer of 2011, 
Applicant returned the vehicle to the 
lender. (Tr. 34)  
g Charged-off account. $2,558 Duplication of SOR 1.c.  
h Collection account. 
 
$243 Paid. Applicant asserts the debt was 
paid by check in 2010 and the collection 
agency states there is a zero balance 
on the account. (Tr. 35, Ex. P) 
i Collection account for 
cellphone service. (Tr. 
35)  
$1,055 Unpaid.  
j Collection account 
attempting to collect for 
restaurant. 
$51 Applicant stopped payment on a check 
after getting food poisoning at a 
restaurant. (Tr. 36) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $42,344  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was $42,000 past due on his mortgage and nine additional charged-off 
or collection accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has brought his mortgage to current status and paid one additional 
collection account (SOR 1.h, $243). Additionally, he stopped payment on a check to a 
restaurant after getting food poisoning, which I find to be a valid reason for nonpayment 
of the debt (SOR 1.j, $51). Additionally, the debt listed in SOR 1.c and 1.g. are the same 
obligation. I find for him as to these four debts. I find against him on the remaining 
debts, which total approximately $21,000. In August 2010, he became aware of the 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
delinquent accounts. He asserted he would make payments on a number of the 
delinquent accounts following the hearing. He was cautioned of the need to provide 
documentation supporting payment of his debts. No documentation showing payment 
has been received. He has no plan to address other delinquencies.  
 
 None of the mitigating factors apply to the remaining seven unpaid debts. 
Because he has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems are continuing in 
nature, he receives minimal application of the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(a). 
Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. He has been aware of the debts 
since August 2010 and his efforts to address his delinquent debts since that time have 
been insufficient.  
 
Likewise, Applicant receives partial application of the mitigating conditions listed 
in AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s wife was unemployed for a period of time and $7,000 to 
$8,000 was spent in attorney fees to help his wife’s son. However, Applicant has been 
employed with the same company for 43 years. There is little documentation that 
Applicant was substantially affected by circumstances beyond his control. Given 
sufficient opportunity to address their financial delinquencies, Applicant has failed to act 
timely or responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to resolve his debts and failed 
to reduce his delinquencies.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Neither Applicant 
nor his wife have received “financial counseling” and several of the delinquent accounts 
have yet to receive any payments.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to the seven debts, 
but does apply to the two debts he paid or is paying, because, to date, Applicant’s 
efforts to address the seven delinquent accounts have been minimal. Having been 
cautioned about the need to document his claims, there is no documentation that any 
payments have been made. Applicant has failed to act aggressively, timely, or 
responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account. 
He claims the repossessed vehicle had engine problems, but he must do more than 
claim a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt. He must 
provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide 
documentation showing evidence of reasonable actions to resolve the issue, which he 
has failed to do.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct, which is 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government has shown Applicant's answers to the e-QIP question as to 
delinquencies on his debts were incorrect, but this does not prove Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose information about his finances. Applicant’s wife handled the family’s 
finances and did not tell him about the financial problems. She did not want to burden 
him with the information. The Applicant denied any intentional falsification. Deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral 
statement to the Government, when applying for a security clearance, is a security 
concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification must be 
deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully.  
 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he was unaware any of his debts were 
delinquent. Having observed Applicant’s demeanor and listened to his testimony, I find 
his answers were not deliberate omissions, concealments, or falsifications.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His work performance is excellent. He has worked for 
the same company for 43 years. He paid one bill and is making monthly payments on 
another. After a lengthy period of inaction during which he did not address his past 
delinquent accounts, he asserts he has initiated some effort to address his debts with 
payments to start following the hearing. The disqualifying evidence under the whole-
person concept is more substantial. In August 2010, he was interviewed about his 
debts. In June 2011, he answered interrogatories about the specific SOR debts. 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
Following the April 24, 2010 hearing, he asserted he would start making payments on 
some of the debts, but provided no documentation showing payment. 
 
Failing to repay creditors or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise 
concerns about Applicant’s fitness to hold a security clearance. An applicant is not 
required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that 
is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent 
debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider 
the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to 
which that plan is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may 
provide for payment on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that 
the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. However, he has documented payment of only one debt and payments to 
address one other debt.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
merited. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance 
in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance with a 
repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not 
warranted.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations. He did not intentionally provide false answers 
on his e-QIP with intent to deceive. The personal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
 
