 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06621 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had two charged-off accounts, eleven accounts placed for collection, 
three past-due accounts, and seven unpaid medical debts. These financial obligations 
total approximately $23,000. He has entered into a debt settlement plan addressing 12 
accounts that total more than $18,000. The incorrect responses to financial questions 
on his security clearance questionnaire were not intentional falsifications. Applicant has 
rebutted or mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct security 
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
Applicant an undated Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
  
 On October 14, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
March 15, 2012, I was assigned the case. On April 5, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on April 24, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 7, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Ex. A and B, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant 
to submit additional information. On April 24, 2012, additional material was submitted 
and admitted into the record as Ex. C and D. Department Counsel had no objection to 
the material. On May 1, 2012, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted eight of the delinquent accounts 
and denied the remainder. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old aircraft electrician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since February 2005, and seeks to maintain a security clearance. From 
December 1990 through December 1994, he served in the U.S. Navy, during the Gulf 
war. (Ex. 5) Following active duty, he was a Navy reservist until medical problems 
cause him to stop. (Ex. 5, Tr. 31)  
 
 Applicant called no witnesses other than himself, and produced no work or 
character references. His current annual base pay is approximately $50,000. (Tr. 32) 
Last year, Applicant’s wife was unemployed. (Tr. 28) She has been recently employed 
and makes $7.25 per hour. (Tr. 28) Applicant and his wife have an 11-year-old son.  
 
 From October 2008 through August 2010, Applicant and his wife underwent 
major surgeries. He had neck surgery and two back surgeries and was out of work for a 
period of time. (Tr. 24) She had ablation surgery and a hysterectomy, which resulted in 
the loss of her job due to time lost from work following her surgeries. (Tr. 26) Their 
health insurance paid some, but not all, of their medical expenses. (Ex. 5) In October 
2010, he was interviewed concerning his finances. In September 2011, he completed 
interrogatories stating he would be re-filling a number of the medical debts with his 
insurance company. (Ex. 6) He believes that one medical bill (SOR 1.c, $118) was paid. 
(Tr. 36)  
 
 Applicant and his wife both opened credit card accounts (SOR 1.h, $3,685 and 
SOR 1.m, $4,724) that were used to pay for medical treatment. Six of the medical debts 
are unpaid; however, the SOR does not specifically allege these accounts were 
delinquent.  They are not alleged to be overdue, charged-off, or collection debts.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 As of September 2011, Applicant’s net monthly income was $3,300 and his 
monthly expenses were $2,227. (Ex. 6) In February 2012, he entered into a debt 
settlement program. The plan required him to make $295 monthly payments for more 
than 36 months to address 11 accounts. (Ex. A, B) The monthly amount is automatically 
debited from this bank account. (Tr. 27) He has made four monthly payments that total 
approximately $1,200. (Tr. 46) The plan allows for the addition of debts to the 
settlement program. (Tr. 60) 
 
 In October 2010, when Applicant completed his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he answered “no” to all the financial questions listed 
in Section 26. (Ex. 1) He failed to indicate he had defaulted on a loan; had debts turned 
over to a collection agency; had an account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; had been more than 180 days delinquent on any 
debt; or was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debt. He answered as he 
did because, at the time, he did not know any accounts had been turned over to a 
collection agency. (Ex. 5) He was receiving medical bills for the surgeries that occurred 
between 2008 and 2010, but did not believe he was delinquent on these debts or any 
other debts. He was unaware any accounts had gone to collection. (Tr. 48)  
 
 In October 2010 and November 2010, during subject interviews concerning his 
finances, Applicant did not recognize ten accounts, did not know their current status, or 
if they had been turned over for collection. (Ex. 5)  
 
 Applicant’s October 13, 2010 credit bureau report (CBR) indicates all of his 
student loans were being paid as agreed. (Ex. 3, C) In December 2006, Applicant 
moved out of an apartment into his home. Prior to leaving, the rental company had 
agreed to keep his security deposit. After vacating the premises, the company 
requested additional money (SOR 1.f, $1,195). (Tr. 36, 37)  
 
 Applicant is current on his $468 monthly car payment for a 2008 Ford. (Tr. 44) 
He has no credit cards. He is current on his $917 monthly mortgage payments. (Tr. 46) 
He has about $5,000 of equity in the home. He has approximately $3,000 in his 
company’s 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 45) He is current on his utility bills and has not 
received any calls or letters from creditors since joining the debt relief program. (Tr. 46) 
He has received financial counseling from his father. (Tr. 56)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s delinquent debts and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Medical debt. Applicant 
denies owing the medical 
debts listed in SOR 1.a 
through1.e and SOR 1.s 
through 1.u. 
$241 He resubmitted these accounts to his 
insurance carrier believing they are 
covered by his insurance.  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
b Medical debt  
 
$1,288 
 
Denied debt, resubmitted to his insurance 
carrier.  
c Medical debt  $118 
 
Applicant believes this debt has been 
paid by his insurance carrier. (Tr. 36) 
d Medical debt (Ex. 3, 7) $55 Denied debt, resubmitted to his insurance 
carrier. 
e Medical debt (Ex. 3) $325 Denied debt, resubmitted to his insurance 
carrier. 
f Collection account for 
apartment complex. (Ex. 3, 
7) 
$1,195 In December 2006, Applicant moved out 
of this apartment forfeiting his security 
deposit. (Tr. 36 – 37)  
g Charged-off department 
store account. (Ex. 3, 7) 
$713 Paying. This debt is included in the debt 
settlement program. (Ex. B, Tr. 38)  
h Charged-off account for 
hearing aids or dental work 
for Applicant’s spouse. (Ex. 
3, 5, 7)  
$3,685 Paying. This debt is included in 
Applicant’s debt settlement program. (Ex. 
B, Tr. 39)  
i Collection account. (Ex. 7) $1,635 Paying. This debt is included in the debt 
settlement program. (Ex. B, Tr. 39) 
j Collection account. (Ex. 7) $661 Paying. This debt is included in the debt 
settlement program. (Ex. B, Tr. 40)  
k Collection account for a 
refrigerator purchase. (Ex. 
3, 7) 
$2,278 Paying. This debt is included in debt 
settlement program. (Ex. B, Tr. 40)  
l Collection account. (Ex. 3, 
7) 
$2,540 
 
Paying. This debt is included in the debt 
settlement program. (Ex. B, Tr. 40)  
m Collection account on a 
medical credit card. (Ex. 3, 
4, 5) 
$4,724 
 
Paying. This debt is included in 
Applicant’s debt settlement program. (Ex. 
B, Tr. 40) This is the same obligation that 
is listed in SOR 1.h. (Tr. 40) 
n Telephone service 
collection account. (Ex. 3, 
7) 
$200 Applicant denied the debt. He has not had 
phone service with this provider since 
2005. (Tr. 41) 
o Past due student loan with 
a balance of $19,110. (Ex. 
7)  
$102 
 
Paying. Applicant is making payments on 
this debt. He paid $120 on February 6, 
2012 and March 26, 2012. (Ex. C, Tr. 41) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
p Past due student loan with 
a balance of $22,003. (Ex. 
7) 
$117 
 
Paying. Applicant is making payments on 
this debt. He paid $120 on February 6, 
2012 and March 26, 2012. (Ex. C, Tr. 41) 
q Medical collection account. 
(Ex. 3) 
$40 
 
Paid. (Tr. 41)  
r Collection account. (Ex. 3) $1,625 
 
Paying. This debt is included in the debt 
settlement program. (Ex. B, Tr. 42)  
s Medical collection account. 
(Ex. 3) 
$123 
 
Denied debt, resubmitted to his insurance 
carrier. 
t Medical acount. (Ex. 3) $163 Denied debt, resubmitted to his insurance 
carrier. 
u Medical account. (Ex. 3) $424 Denied debt, resubmitted to his insurance 
carrier. 
v Department store account 
90 days past due with a 
balance of $1,589. (Ex. 3, 
7) 
$56 Paying. This debt is included in 
Applicant’s debt settlement program. (Ex. 
6, B, D, Tr. 42)  
w Department store collection 
account. (Ex. 3, 7) 
$659 Paying. This debt is included in 
Applicant’s debt settlement program. (Ex. 
B, Tr. 43)  
 Total debt listed in SOR $22,837  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had two charged-off accounts, three past-due accounts, and eleven 
accounts placed for collection. He also had seven unpaid, but not delinquent, medical 
accounts. These 23 obligations totaled approximately $23,000. Disqualifying Conditions 
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 From October 2008 through August 2010, both Applicant and his wife underwent 
numerous surgeries. The medical debts account for half of his debt ($11,256 out of a 
total of $22,837). Seven of the medical debts, totaling approximately $2,700, are listed 
as owing2, but are not listed as past due, charged off, or in collection. Of the eleven 
medical debts, Applicant has paid one medical debt (SOR 1.q, $40) and two others 
(SOR 1.h, $3,685 and SOR 1.m, $4,724) are included in a settlement payment plan. He 
                                                          
2
 The fact that a debt is unpaid is not necessarily a security concern. Debts that are not being addressed 
as agreed are of concern. However, unpaid debts will be considered and given appropriate weight in the 
overall decision as to Applicant’s financial status. 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
has resubmitted the remaining seven medical debts to his insurance carrier for 
payment.  
 
Because Applicant has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems are 
continuing in nature, he receives minimal application of the mitigating conditions listed in 
AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant was substantially affected by circumstances beyond his control. Under 
AG & 20(b), Applicant underwent three surgeries and his wife two. Not only did their 
medical problems result in medical bills, but his wife’s surgery resulted in the loss of her 
job, which increased their financial difficulties. His medical problems cause him to leave 
the U.S. Navy Reserve and to lose income associated with his Reserve service. Half of 
the debt relates to medical treatment for his surgeries, but the other half was not the 
result of factors beyond his control. AG & 20(b) applies to the medical bills.  
 
Under AG & 20 (c), Applicant has received financial counseling and his financial 
problems are under control.  AG & 20(c) applies.  
 
Applicant had three past-due accounts. He is now current on his two student loan 
accounts (SOR 1.o and SOR 1.p), and current on his department store account (SOR 
1.v). He has a settlement repayment plan addressing nine charged-off or collection 
accounts. More than $18,000 of the SOR debt, equivalent to 80 per cent of the SOR 
debts, is included in the plan. He has the ability to add additional debts to the plan. He 
has made his monthly payments for a sufficient time to provide assurance that he will 
continue with his monthly payments until the accounts are paid. AG & 20(d) applies. 
 
The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish 
that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him 
to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan, which he has. Applicant’s entire financial 
situation and the actions he has taken must be evaluated to determine if the plan is 
credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment 
on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant’s plan addresses 80 percent of the debt, two additional student loans 
are being paid as agreed, and seven other medical debts are simply listed as unpaid. 
The medical bills are not alleged to be delinquent. This addresses the majority of the 
Applicant’s debt. Two debts are neither included in the repayment agreement nor have 
been addressed: the apartment debt and the phone service debt. He believed his 
security deposit would be sufficient to cover all costs when he terminated the lease. If 
the debt (SOR 1.f, $1,195) is a valid debt, I believe Applicant would add it to his 
repayment agreement. This is also true of the telephone service debt (SOR 1.n, $200). 
Even though Applicant disputes these two debts, AG & 20(e) does not apply, because 
Applicant has not provided written documentation supporting the dispute.  
 
9 
 
 
 
 
The two unaddressed obligations and the remaining seven unpaid medical debts 
total approximately $4,000. These obligations are sufficiently small as to not raise 
concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The following personal conduct disqualifying conditions potentially apply to the facts of 
this case:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
 In October 2010, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he answered “no” to all 
the financial questions listed in Section 26. (Ex. 1) He failed to indicate he had defaulted 
on a loan; had debts turned over to a collection agency; had an account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; had been more than 
180 days delinquent on any debt; or was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any 
debt.  
 
Applicant’s answers related to his debts were incorrect, but this does not prove 
he deliberately failed to disclose information about his finances. Applicant denied any 
intentional falsification. Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material 
fact in any written document or oral statement to the Government, when applying for a 
security clearance, is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a 
falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done 
knowingly and willfully.  
 
 When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he was receiving medical bills for his and 
his wife’s surgeries, but was unaware any accounts were delinquent. He did not know 
any accounts had been turned over to a collection agency. Having observed Applicant’s 
demeanor and listened to his testimony, I find his e-QIP answers were not deliberate 
omissions, concealments, or falsifications. I find for him as to personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. Half of the debt was incurred for 
medical treatment. The surgeries resulted in medical bills, but also resulted in his wife 
losing her job. His medical problems have prevented him from being able to perform 
reserve duty. The loss of his wife’s income and his Reserve income added to their 
financial problems. Applicant is living within his means and the debts are now being 
addressed. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid; it is 
whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) His past obligations are being addressed. Although he 
knew he had medical bills, he was unaware of any collection accounts when he 
completed his e-QIP. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.w:  For Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
