                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11–09929
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
June 29, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaires for National Security Positions dated
September 10, 1997, and May 19, 2008.   (Government Exhibits 2 and 4.)  On a date
uncertain, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H and E for Applicant.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program”
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on April 4, 2012, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on May 25, 2012.  A notice of hearing was issued May 30, 2012,  and the
hearing was scheduled for June 14, 2012.  At the hearing the Government presented
eight exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 8.  The Applicant presented
four exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through D.  He also testified on his
own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on June 25, 2012.  Based upon a
2
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 63 years old and has a Ph.D in Applied Science and Physics.
He is employed by a defense contractor as a Research Scientist and is applying for a
security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.) 
The Applicant began working for his current employer in 2001.  For the past
thirty-one years he has worked for various government contractors.  He held a Q-
clearance from Department of Energy from 1978 to 1988, and a secret clearance from
DoD from 1988 to 2009.  He is now eligible to retire, but plans to work four or five more
years before doing so.     
While in graduate school, from 1982 to 1985, the Applicant took prescription diet
pills that were not prescribed to him, but were prescribed to his friend.  The pills are an
appetite suppressant and known to effectively control weight loss.  He discontinued
taking them in 1985 or 1986.
Between 2002 and 2009, the Applicant used marijuana two to four occasions at
social settings where it would be passed around.  It was typical for him to take a puff of
the marijuana cigarette and then pass it on.  (Tr. p. 30.)  The Applicant testified that
when he used marijuana he made a knowing and conscious decision to ingest it.  (Tr. p.
42.)  He also knew that the use of marijuana was illegal and that it was against his
company’s policies.  He stated that because his use of illegal drugs was infrequent,
minor and irrelevant that it was not of concern.  (Tr. pp. 41 and 50.)  
In 2007, the Applicant signed a document for Program Special Access indicating
that he understood DoD and company policy that prohibits the use of illegal drugs.  (Tr.
p. 51.)  During an interview with a DoD investigator in July 2008, the Applicant did not
disclose his use of amphetamines and marijuana.  (Tr. p. 55.) In April 2009, he
underwent a polygraph examination.  In November 2009, his special access was
revoked.       
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he has engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations.  
3
The Applicant denied each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  He completed a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions dated September 10, 1997.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  Question 24(b), of the
application asked him if he has ever illegally used a controlled substance while
employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly or immediately affecting
public safety?  The Applicant answered, “NO.”  This was a false answer.  The Applicant
failed to disclose the fact that he had used amphetamines, (prescription drugs) that
were not prescribed to him while possessing a security clearance.  
The Applicant completed another Questionnaire for National Security Positions
dated May 19, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  Question 24(a) of the application asked
him if since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, he had he illegally
used any controlled substance, for example, “marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine,
hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) amphetamines, depressants
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogens (LSD, PCP, etc) or
prescription drugs?”  The Applicant answered, “NO.”  
Question 24(b) of the application asked the Applicant if he had he ever illegally
used a controlled substance while employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor,
or courtroom official; while possessing a security clearance; or while in a position
directly or immediately affecting public safety?  The Applicant answered, “NO.”  These
were false answers.  The Applicant failed to disclose the fact that he had used
amphetamines, (prescription drugs) that were not prescribed for him and marijuana,
while possessing a security clearance.  
As mentioned above, as part of his security clearance investigation, in April 2009,
the Applicant underwent a polygraph examination.  Just prior to the administration of the
exam, the Applicant told the examiner that he had illegally used amphetamines and
marijuana.  The Applicant testified that the reason he did not reveal his use of
prescription drugs and marijuana use earlier on his security clearance applications is
because he did not take the time or ask the questions he should have with careful
reading and understanding.  (Tr. pp. 33 -34.) 
Mitigation
A letter of recommendation form the Applicant’s manager dated June 8, 2012,
indicates that the Applicant, who has worked for his company since 2001, is a
conscientious worker who is very reliable and who successfully meets his commitments
on the job.  He has good technical judgment and has become a technical leader in the
organization.  He has demonstrated high ethical standards and is recommended for a
security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
Applicant’s performance evaluation from January 1, 2011, through December 31,
2012 reflects that the Applicant has either “met expectations” or “exceeds expectations”
in every category.  His manager indicates that the Applicant is performing at or above
expectations.  He also cites that the Applicant had an outstanding year on various
4
projects to which he was assigned and led them to their successful completion.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)
Excerpts from the Applicant’s associate technical fellowship package indicates
that as a candidate he was admired and respected by his supervisors, professional
colleagues and peers at his company.  His impressive capabilities as an Engineer are
noted in detail.  He is described as having diverse capabilities including the inherent
ability to pull together large complex projects as the technical lead in a cohesive
manner.  He has been very innovative in seeking solutions to nearly impossible material
and processing challenges.  His knowledge and understanding, attention to detail, and
exceptional creativity has been a great asset to the organization.  On a personal level,
he is honest, open and authoritative.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  
The Applicant has received a number of awards, commendations and certificates
of appreciation from his employers recognizing his exceptional performance on the job.
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
5
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities;
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
6
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H), and dishonesty (Guideline E).
The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness
on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's
conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case
under Guidelines H and E of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that the Applicant illegally used amphetamines that were not
prescribed to him from 1982 to 1985, and marijuana on at least two to four occasions
between 2002 to 2009, while possessing a DoD security clearance.  In 2007, he signed
7
a security document that stated he knew that it was illegal and against company policy
to use illegal drugs.  He made a conscious decision to use illegal drugs and has
intentionally disregarded the law and DoD policy.  Although he has not used illegal
drugs in three years, his judgement is so warped that it raised serious security
concerns.  Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any
drug abuse, 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, and
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  None of the
mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
 
Furthermore, the Applicant deliberately concealed his illegal use of prescription
drugs and marijuana on his security clearance applications in response to questions
about his drug history.  There is no excuse for this misconduct.  The Government relies
on the representations of its defense contractors and must be able to trust them in every
instance.  It was only when he met with the polygrapher that he revealed his illegal drug
use.  The Applicant made no prompt, good faith effort to correct his mistakes before
being confronted by the polygrapher.  The Applicant cannot at this time be deemed
sufficiently trustworthy.  In fact, he has demonstrated unreliability and untrustworthiness.
Under the particular facts of this case, his poor personal conduct is considered a
significant security risk, which prohibits a favorable determination in this case.  Under
Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Condition 16.(a) deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities applies.  None of the
mitigating conditions are applicable.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is not a young,
inexperienced scientist.  He has worked for the defense industry for thirty one years,
has many years of experience, holds a Ph.D in Physics, and understands the
requirements of holding a security clearance.  He should be a role model for those less
experienced in the industry.  Instead, he has chosen to use illegal drugs after having
been granted a security clearance, and has deliberately falsified his security clearance
applications.  These are indicators of poor judgment and unreliability that preclude him
from security clearance eligibility at this time.  There is no excuse for this illegal conduct.
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualification
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is and has
been sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect the
8
government’s national interest. Based upon the conduct outlined here, this Applicant
has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does not meet the eligibility
requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.c.: Against the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
