 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-10004 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel; and 
John B. Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines K (Handling 
Protected Information), M (Use of Information Technology (IT) Systems), E (Personal 
Conduct), and F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 23, 
2010. On March 7, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
him that it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him access to classified information, and it recommended that his case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to grant or deny his 
application. DOHA set forth the basis for its action in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
citing security concerns under Guidelines K, M, E, and F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 19, 2012; answered it on April 2, 2012; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was 
ready to proceed on April 27, 2012, and the case was assigned to me on May 2, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 2012, scheduling it for May 21, 2012. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of 
two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through P, which were 
admitted. AX I was admitted over Department Counsel’s objection. AX A through H and 
J through P were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until June 4, 2012, 
to enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX 
Q through X. Department Counsel did not object to AX R, S, and W, which were 
admitted. Department Counsel objected to AX Q, T, U, V, and X, which were received 
over Department Counsel’s objection. My rulings on Department Counsel’s objections 
are discussed below. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 30, 2012. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
On my own motion, I have taken administrative notice of the provisions of the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR), published by the American Psychiatric Association, pertaining to Applicant’s 
mental disorders. Using the Federal Rules of Evidence as a guide, I have noted that 
Rule 201(c) provides: “A court may take judicial notice, whether requested or not.” I 
have notified counsel for both sides and given them an opportunity to object, in 
accordance with Rule 201(e), which provides: “A party is entitled upon timely request to 
an opportunity to be heard as to the propriety of taking judicial notice and the tenor of 
the matter noticed.” (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I) Neither party objected. (HX II and III.) The 
specific provisions of DSM-IV-TR that I have administratively noticed are set out below 
in my “Findings of Fact.” 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 Department Counsel objected to AX I, a diagnostic evaluation summary from a 
psychologist who evaluated Applicant, on the ground that it was irrelevant. (Tr. 23.) I 
overruled the objection but informed counsel that if I determined, upon reviewing all the 
evidence, that AX I was irrelevant, I would disregard it and state in my decision that I did 
not consider it. (Tr. 24.) Department Counsel also objected to AX Q, an updated 
evaluation from the same psychologist, and AX T, U, V, and X, pertaining to various 
mental disorders, on the ground that they are irrelevant. (Hearing Exhibit III.) 
 
The Appeal Board has recognized that the DOHA process is designed to 
encourage administrative judges to err on the side of admitting evidence and then 
considering a party’s objections in deciding what, if any weight to give that evidence. 
 
3 
 
 
“Because DOHA proceedings are conducted before impartial, professional fact finders, 
there is less concern about the potential prejudicial effect of specific items of evidence 
than there is in judicial proceedings conducted before a lay jury.” ISCR Case No. 04-
12449 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2007). 
 
 After reviewing all the evidence in the record, I conclude that the AX I and Q 
through X are relevant. The evidence that Applicant has mental disorders of a type that 
begin in childhood and that he is receiving treatment for those disorders is relevant to 
explain the conduct alleged in the SOR, to determine whether such conduct is likely to 
recur, and as part of my whole-person analysis. AX V has limited relevance because it 
pertains to a childhood disorder, but it has probative value because the other evidence 
indicates that Applicant’s mental disorders are the types that usually begin in childhood. 
AX X has limited relevance, but it also has probative value because it discusses a 
specific disorder that must be excluded to arrive at the diagnosis in AX I and Q. AX X 
also is relevant because it pertains to a mental disorder for which one of Applicant’s 
stepchildren requires treatment.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 4.a and 
denied all the other allegations in the SOR. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old senior systems engineer employed by a federal 
contractor since February 2011. He obtained an associate’s degree in applied science 
in December 2005, a bachelor’s degree in information technology in September 2006, 
and a master’s degree in information technology in September 2009. In addition, he has 
obtained numerous technical certifications since September 2009. (AX J.) 
 
 Applicant married in October 2005. He has three stepchildren, ages 15, 13, and 
10. The oldest is bipolar and has attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), the 
middle child is autistic, and the youngest has Asperger’s syndrome with traits of ADHD. 
All three stepchildren require counseling, medication, and special accommodations at 
school. (Tr. 49-52.) Applicant and his wife have two daughters, ages four and two. The 
older has not been diagnosed with any special needs, but the younger does not speak 
and is receiving speech therapy. (GX 2 at I-31, 32; Tr. 52-53.) 
 
 Applicant was employed by a local college as a system administrator from May 
2000 to December 2003. On his SCA, he stated that he was fired because of a 
“personality conflict.” According to Applicant, a co-worker who had repeatedly made 
derogatory comments about Applicant became his supervisor. At some time in late 
2003, Applicant was presented with a document stating that customers had complained 
about him. Applicant believed that the document was fabricated by his supervisor. 
Nevertheless, he signed the document, agreeing to the findings, without realizing its 
import. Shortly thereafter, he was fired. (GX 3 at 4; Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was a full-time student and unemployed from December 2003 to April 
2004. (GX 3 at 5.) He was employed as a part-time system administrator for a university 
from April 2004 to November 2005. He worked as a system administrator for an optical 
manufacturer from November 2005 to November 2007. On his SCA, he reported that he 
was fired by the optical manufacturer for insubordination. (GX 1 at 23.)  According to 
Applicant, he, his supervisor, and a female employee were engaged in a closed-door 
discussion when his supervisor called the female employee a sexually derogatory 
name. Both Applicant and the supervisor were fired after the female employee filed a 
complaint. Applicant denied making any comments to the female employee and 
believes that he was fired because of “guilt by association.” (GX 3 at 6; Tr. 42-43.)  
 
Applicant worked as a system administrator for an automotive manufacturer from 
November 2007 to March 2008. He was fired at the end of his probationary period. 
According to Applicant, his supervisor was too busy to give him guidance about his role 
in the company. He testified that he had difficulty communicating with his supervisor and 
his peers. His employer told him he was “not a good fit” for the company. (GX 3 at 7; Tr. 
43-44.)  
 
 Applicant was employed as a system administrator for an IT consulting firm from 
April to September 2008. He received a security clearance and eligibility for access to 
sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in August 2008. He left this job to accept a 
position as a federal employee. 
 
Applicant was employed by another government agency (AGA) from September 
2008 to September 2010. He received a verbal reprimand shortly after he began his 
employment. When he was interviewed by a security investigator in April 2011, he 
stated that he could not remember the basis for the reprimand, but he remembered that 
he was told to collaborate more with his co-workers more instead of working alone. (GX 
3 at 7.) He received a written reprimand in 2010 for failure to follow procedures. (GX 3 
at 8.) An investigation was initiated by the AGA in May 2010 following a report that he 
had installed an upgrade on the AGA network without authorization. The report of 
investigation was completed in August 2010. Applicant’s SCI eligibility and collateral 
clearance were terminated in September 2010, when he resigned by mutual agreement 
following notice of unsatisfactory performance.  
 
 The report of investigation leading to Applicant’s resignation found that, at least 
once a month, he installed software or hardware upgrades to a computer network 
without proper authorization or coordination and that he communicated with agency 
vendors on his home email account. It also found that, on at least two occasions, he 
copied personal documents from his classified workplace computer onto a compact disk 
and loaded them on his home computer, and that on multiple occasions he conducted 
research at home, copied the results of his research onto a compact disk, and then 
copied the information from the compact disk to an AGA network computer. (GX 10.)  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant disagreed with the report of investigation’s finding that 
he installed upgrades without authorization. He testified that he received conflicting 
 
5 
 
 
instructions, with his team lead instructing him not to install the upgrades and the 
department chief instructing him to install them. He was familiar with the process for 
approving an upgrade, stating that it was a documented procedure that he had been 
using for years. (Tr. 89-91.) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the only document he copied from his 
workplace network and took home was his personal resume. (Tr. 33.) On cross-
examination, he admitted electronically transmitting his leave and earnings statement 
(LES) from his workplace network to his bankruptcy lawyer. (Tr. 94.)  
 
Applicant testified that he received a number of security briefings, and he knew 
that he was not permitted to bring a compact disk from home and insert it into a 
workplace computer. He testified that he was informed by email that his resume was 
unclassified. (Tr. 92.) The email was not offered in evidence.  He downloaded his 
unclassified resume from a classified computer onto a compact disk supplied by 
contractor personnel for use at work, and copied the resume from the compact disk to 
his personal computer. He believed he had approval to download and copy his resume. 
(Tr. 151-52.) During cross-examination, he appeared to believe that once the AGA 
determined that his resume was unclassified, it was permissible for him to download it, 
copy it, and take it home. (Tr. 152-54.) 
 
Applicant admitted using his personal computer and personal email account to 
solicit quotes from small business vendors after normal working hours. He testified that 
using personal computers to communicate with vendors was a common practice among 
contractor employees and that his supervisors were aware of it. He either printed the 
pricing data at home or he would log onto the same web site at work, using the 
unclassified network, and print the pricing data at work. He denied copying pricing data 
onto compact disks and copying the data from the compact disks to his workplace 
computer. He testified he knew that it would have been a security violation to copy the 
pricing data from his home computer to a compact disk and then use the compact disk 
to load the data onto his classified computer. Finally, he testified that if he had been told 
not to use his personal computer to communicate with vendors, he would have stopped 
doing it. (Tr. 33-34, 95-96, 147-49.) During the investigation of his conduct, Applicant 
surrendered his personal computer to investigators, who determined that there was no 
classified information on it. (Tr. 155-57.) 
 
 No evidence was presented showing the specific rules violated by Applicant. The 
report of investigation lists enclosures including an “Information Systems Acceptable 
Use Policy” and two documents entitled “Installation and Modification Guide.” At the 
hearing, Applicant declined to answer questions about policies, procedures, and training 
at the AGA, because he was concerned that they might be classified. (Tr. 80-82.)  
 
 Applicant was unemployed from September 2010 to December 2010. He worked 
as a senior systems administrator for a retirement community from December 2010 until 
March 2011, when he was terminated for “lack of customer focus.” He testified that he 
was terminated because he questioned the assistant director of nursing about her need 
 
6 
 
 
for a cell phone. He was trying to determine if her requirements could be met by a less 
expensive cell phone, because he was trying to reduce costs. (Tr. 45-46.) He was 
unemployed until he began his current employment. 
 
 Applicant started having financial problems in 2007, which he attributed to failure 
to maintain consistent employment. His SCA reflects almost continuous employment but 
frequent job changes. His wife was not employed outside the home, except for 
occasional short-term periods of employment. She received sporadic child support 
payments of $375 for two of her children. Applicant and his wife purchased two cars in 
2007 and a new economy car in July 2008. He could not afford the payments on the 
newest car and he surrendered it to the dealer in February 2009. His change of jobs in 
2009 resulted in the need to rent a home at the new location while still owning a home 
at the old location. His wife was unable to find employment at the new location. (Tr. 47.) 
He obtained financial counseling in May 2009, and he was advised he had several 
options, including finding a second part-time job, working overtime, or filing bankruptcy. 
(GX 9 at 2.) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in January 2010 and received a 
discharge in April 2010. (GX 4.) He completed the credit counseling required by the 
bankruptcy court. (AX K.) His credit bureau report dated February 21, 2012, reflected 
that, subsequent to his bankruptcy discharge, a $306 medical bill (SOR ¶ 4.g) was 
referred for collection in February 2010, a $56 medical bill (SOR ¶ 4.b) was referred for 
collection in May 2010, a television satellite service bill for $151 (SOR ¶ 4.c) was 
referred for collection in July 2010, two medical bills for $92 and $18 were referred for 
collection in August 2010, and a $312 medical bill was referred for collection in 
September 2010. (GX 6 at 1; AX M at 63-66.)  
 
The satellite service bill was paid in full in March 2012. (AX H.) A letter dated 
May 18, 2012, from the creditor for four of the medical bills reflects that the $312 bill 
(SOR ¶ 4.d) was erroneously sent to collection. (AX P.) Applicant testified he is making 
payments on the three medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 4.b, 4.e, and 4.g, and his 
testimony is corroborated by the May 2012 letter from the creditor. (Tr. 144.). Applicant 
denied the $18 medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 4.f, and he testified that the creditor has 
been unable locate any documentation for it. (Tr. 57.)  
 
 As of the date of the hearing, Applicant was earning about $110,000 per year. 
His wife is employed as a registered nurse, earning about $55,000 per year. (Tr. 29.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he realized that he might have a mental disorder when he 
had his stepchildren diagnosed. He sought treatment and began taking medication for 
ADHD on July 21, 2010. His initial dosage was 15 milligrams per day. His dosage was 
increased to 20 milligrams per day on August 24, 2010, and increased again to 25 
milligrams per day on March 4, 2011. He is still taking the March 2011 dosage. (Tr. 110; 
AX S.) His medications are monitored by his primary care physician, whom he sees 
every two or three months. (AX Q; AX S; Tr. 38.) Applicant testified that the effect of his 
 
7 
 
 
current medications is to give him a “split second” to think about what he intends to say 
instead of saying it without thinking about how the recipient will interpret it. (Tr. 46.) 
 
Applicant met with a licensed psychologist on March 15, 2011; March 29, 2011; 
and March 22, 2012. She concluded that Applicant met the diagnostic criteria for the 
following disorders: 1 
 
 314.01: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Combined Type; 
 
 300.00: Anxiety Disorder, Not Otherwise Specified; and 
 
 299.80: Pervasive Developmental Disorder (PDD), Not Otherwise Specified. 
 
 The psychologist’s narrative discussion includes the following: 
 
[Applicant] discussed significant difficulty during his childhood years with 
deficits in social interaction skills, particularly with same-age peers. He 
struggled with understanding social cues, the feelings of others, and how 
to interact regarding topics not of interest to him. Additionally, he 
described very intense reactions to changes in routine or when 
unexpected events occurred. As an adult he has developed positive 
coping mechanisms to help ameliorate any negative impact on these 
social perspective-taking difficulties; however, at times his challenges in 
this area have created problems. 
.     .     . 
 
Overall [Applicant] does not meet sufficient criteria for Asperger 
Syndrome; however, he does exhibit the history and current issues seen 
in individuals with PDD, Not Otherwise Specified. [Applicant] very likely 
would have met criteria for Asperger’s Syndrome as a child/adolescent 
and young adult; however, he has worked diligently to improve non-verbal 
communication, understanding social cues, and working with family and 
co-workers on positive social interaction skills. . . [Applicant] also 
continues to work consistently on progressing with how he understands 
social situation, impulse control strategies, and managing anxiety/stress. 
Overall he has developed a very positive set of coping mechanisms that 
provide him with the ability to work productively at a high level. 
 
 The psychologist recommended that Applicant continue to work with his 
physician to manage his medications, communicate to his supervisors when he 
encounters difficulty solving any interaction difficulties with a co-worker, and work with a 
therapist as needed for anxiety management, social interactions skill development, and 
strategies for handling his ADHD symptoms. She also recommended that his 
                                                          
1 Although the psychologist did not specifically cite DSM-IV-TR, she used its terminology and numbering 
system.  
 
 
8 
 
 
supervisors have a mediation process between Applicant and co-workers and that they 
communicate to Applicant directly and clearly how they expect him to proceed if 
interaction problems affect his work effectiveness or the business atmosphere. (AX I; 
AX Q.2) 
 
 ADHD always begins in early childhood, but it may not be diagnosed until later in 
life. ADHD symptoms can include trouble focusing or concentrating, impulsivity, difficulty 
completing tasks, disorganization, trouble coping with stress, and unstable 
relationships. The essential feature of ADHD is “a persistent pattern of inattention 
and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity.” Individuals with ADHD may fail to give close attention 
to details, make careless mistakes, fail to follow through on requests or instructions, be 
forgetful, not listen to others, and fail to follow rules. Individuals with ADHD typically 
make comments out of turn, fail to listen to directions, initiate conversations at 
inappropriate times, and interrupt others excessively. Treatment for ADHD includes 
stimulant drugs or other medications and psychotherapy. The diagnostic criteria for 
ADHD require a finding that some hyperactive-impulsive or inattentive symptoms were 
present before age seven. (AX V; AX W; DSM-IV-TR at 85-92.) 
 
 Pervasive development disorder (PDD) is a broad category of mental disorders 
that are usually evident in childhood and are characterized by severe and pervasive 
impairment in several areas of development: reciprocal social interaction skills, 
communication skills, or the presence of stereotyped behavior, interests, and activities. 
The specific disorders in this category include autistic disorder, Rett’s disorder, 
childhood disintegrative disorder, Asperger’s disorder (also called Asperger’s 
syndrome), and PDD not otherwise specified (NOS). PDD NOS is the appropriate 
diagnosis when there is a severe and pervasive impairment in the development of 
reciprocal social interactions associated with impairment in either verbal or nonverbal 
communication skills or with the presence of stereotyped behavior, but the criteria are 
not met for a specific pervasive development disorder (such as Asperger’s disorder or 
autism), schizophrenia, schizotypal personality disorder, or avoidant personality 
disorder. (DSM-IV-TR at 69-84.) 
 
 The essential features of Asperger’s syndrome are “severe and sustained 
impairment in social interaction . . . and the development of restricted, repetitive 
patterns of behavior, interests, and activities.” It may involve “marked impairment in the 
use of multiple nonverbal behaviors (e.g., eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body 
postures and gestures) to regulate social interaction and communication.” Young adults 
may “lack understanding of the conventions of social interaction.” (DSM-IV-TR at 80.) 
 
 Anxiety disorder NOS includes disorders with prominent anxiety or phobic 
avoidance that do not meet the criteria for any specific anxiety disorder or adjustment 
disorder. (DSM-IV-TR at 484.) Applicant’s anxiety disorder is of minimal relevance in 
this case. 
 
                                                          
2 AX Q repeats most of the analysis in AX I, but is updated to reflect the March 2012 assessment. 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant’s current facility security officer (FSO) submitted a letter on his behalf 
and testified at the hearing. The FSO stated that he was aware of Applicant’s diagnosis 
of ADHD. In his letter, he stated that Applicant “has been nothing short of inspirational” 
in managing his ADHD. (AX D.) At the hearing, the FSO testified that he was familiar 
with the allegations in the SOR, although he did not know all the details about the 
security violations that led to Applicant’s resignation in lieu of termination in September 
2010. (Tr. 124-25.) He characterized Applicant’s performance as “exemplary.” Although 
they had hoped to obtain a security clearance for Applicant in time for a specific 
contract, that deadline had passed at the time of the hearing, but they want to have 
Applicant available for other contracts. (Tr. 126-27.) 
 
 The president and chief executive officer (CEO) of the company where  Applicant 
is currently employed joined in the FSO’s letter and also testified at the hearing. He 
testified that his company recruited Applicant because of his IT experience and has 
promoted him to senior systems engineer, the highest engineering level except for the 
company’s chief technologist. The CEO was familiar with the allegations in the SOR and 
had discussed them with Applicant. He also was aware that Applicant was dealing with 
medical issues. He testified that Applicant’s conduct and performance as portrayed in 
the SOR was contrary to what he had observed since hiring Applicant. The CEO 
unqualifiedly recommended that Applicant receive a security clearance. (Tr. 130-39.) 
 
 A U.S. Air Force captain, who has known Applicant since 1994, describes him as 
a loyal and trustworthy friend who can be entrusted with national security information. 
(AX A.) A professional colleague, who has known Applicant for about six years, states 
that his work ethic, intelligence, and integrity are above reproach. (AX B.) A co-worker 
describes Applicant as an “exemplary employee,” who has repeatedly demonstrated his 
professionalism, technical knowledge, honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity. (AX C.) A 
former mentor on a special project stated that Applicant worked with integrity and team 
spirit, and he was “gracious about criticism and advice.” (AX E.) An Army National 
Guard captain who met Applicant in 2001 describes him as an honest, trustworthy, and 
loyal friend and recommends that he be granted a security clearance. (AX N.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
 
10 
 
 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was cited by an AGA for committing security 
violations by copying data from a classified computer system to unclassified media, 
 
11 
 
 
removing it from his workplace, and loading the data on his personal computer (SOR ¶ 
1.a). The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 33: “Deliberate or 
negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other 
sensitive information raises doubt about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, 
reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious 
security concern.” 
 
 The disqualifying conditions relevant to this case are:  
 
AG ¶ 34(b): collecting or storing classified or other protected information at 
home or in any other unauthorized location;  
 
AG ¶ 34(c): loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or 
otherwise handling classified reports, data, or other information on any 
unapproved equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word 
processor, or computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, 
handheld, “palm” or pocket device, or other adjunct equipment;  
 
AG 34(g): any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
other sensitive information; and 
 
AG 34(h): negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling 
by management.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 34(b), (c), and (g) are established. The SOR did not specify what data 
Applicant was alleged to have copied. The AGA’s report of investigation did not identify 
what data he was found to have copied and taken home. Department Counsel 
presented no evidence showing what, if any, rules were violated. Applicant admitted 
copying his resume to a compact disk, taking it home, and loading it onto his home 
computer. He also admitted electronically transmitting his leave and earnings statement 
to his bankruptcy attorney. There is no evidence that the resume and LES were 
classified, and they were not “protected information” within the meaning of this 
disqualifying condition because they were Applicant’s records. However, Applicant 
admitted that there was a risk of classified or protected information being embedded in 
external media whenever information is downloaded from a classified system. The AGA 
report of investigation found that he had violated internal AGA rules, and the enclosures 
to the report list an information systems use policy and two installation and modification 
guides. This evidence is “more than a scintilla” and is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 34 (b), 
(c), and (g). 
 
 AG ¶ 34(h) is established. The list of enclosures to the AGA report lists “Email 
Documentation of August 2009 Counseling.” While the email documentation of 
counseling was not attached to the report of investigation, this notation is sufficient to 
establish that Applicant was counseled about his security habits in August 2009. In 
addition, Applicant admitted to a security investigator that he was verbally reprimanded 
 
12 
 
 
shortly after he began working at the AGA and received a written reprimand in mid-
2010.  
 
 The relevant mitigating condition under this guideline is AG ¶ 35(a): “so much 
time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” No other enumerated mitigating 
conditions are relevant. 
 
 Applicant’s last security violation occurred more than two years ago, but this time 
period is of little probative value because he has not been working in a classified 
environment since he resigned from the AGA position in September 2010. However, the 
evidence reflects that Applicant’s security violations occurred before he began receiving 
treatment for his ADHD and PDD.  
 
 Applicant’s termination in March 2011 for “lack of customer focus” was not 
related to any security violations, and it occurred at about the time the dosage of his 
medication was increased to its current level and he had his first two consultations with 
the psychologist. The incident leading up to this termination occurred at some time prior 
to his termination. The March 2011 termination is relevant to the extent that it suggests 
Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to follow rules even after he began receiving 
treatment for ADHD and PDD.  
 
 The testimony of Applicant’s current supervisors and the diagnostic assessment 
of his psychologist reflect that he has responded well to his current level of medication 
and the psychotherapy. He has become a valued and trusted employee, and he has not 
repeated the behavior reflected in the SOR. Thus, I conclude that his security violations 
were the product of unusual circumstances, i.e., his ADHD and PDD, and they are 
unlikely to recur. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 35(a) is established. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges SOR ¶ 1.a under this guideline. The concern under this 
guideline is: “Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining 
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness or ability to properly 
protect sensitive systems, networks, and information.” AG ¶ 39.  
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are:  
 
AG ¶ 40(e): unauthorized use of a government or other information 
technology system; 
 
AG ¶ 40(f): introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, 
software, or media to or from any information technology system without 
 
13 
 
 
authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines, or 
regulations; and 
 
AG ¶ 40(g): negligence or lax security habits in handling information 
technology that persist despite counseling by management.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 40(e) is established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG 
¶ 34(g). Applicant’s unauthorized installation of upgrades to the AGA network 
establishes AG ¶ 40(f).3 AG ¶ 40(g) is established for the reasons set out in the above 
discussion of AG ¶ 34(h). 
 
 The relevant mitigating condition under this guideline is AG ¶ 41(a), which is 
identical to AG ¶ 35(a), discussed above. For the reasons set out in the above 
discussion, I conclude that this mitigating condition is established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was terminated from a job in December 2003 
due to a personality conflict (SOR ¶ 3.a), terminated from a job in November 2007 for 
insubordination and sexual harassment (SOR ¶ 3.b), terminated from a job in March 
2008 due to a personality conflict (SOR ¶ 3.c), terminated from a federal job with an 
AGA and had his security clearance and SCI eligibility suspended in September 2010 
(SOR ¶ 3.d), and terminated from a job in March 2011 for lack of customer focus (SOR 
¶ 3.e). The SOR also cross-alleges a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge and six 
delinquent debts that are discussed below under Guideline F (SOR ¶ 3.f). 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” The evidence establishes SOR ¶¶ 3.a through 
3.e, except that it does not establish that Applicant was involuntarily terminated by the 
AGA. He was not involuntarily terminated by the AGA; he resigned in lieu of termination. 
 Applicant’s employment record establishes the following disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
                                                          
3 The unauthorized installation of upgrades was not alleged in the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR 
may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative 
guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to 
consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person 
analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the evidence of 
unauthorized installation of upgrades for these limited purposes.  
 
14 
 
 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . (2) disruptive, violent, or 
other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; [and] (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 Being ill-suited for a customer-oriented job, lack of tact, social ineptitude, or 
having a disagreeable personality are not necessarily qualities that raise security 
concerns under Guideline E, unless they result in “disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior.” However, inability or unwillingness to follow rules and 
instructions, inappropriate sexual comments, or inattention to details can raise 
questions about an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is established for the reasons set out in the above discussions of AG 
¶¶ 35(c) and 41(a). AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e) are established because Applicant has 
acknowledged his behavior, obtained treatment, and has established himself as a 
 
15 
 
 
trustworthy, dependable employee. He has been open and candid about his past 
employment problems and enjoys a good reputation with his current employer, thereby 
reducing his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. As discussed below 
under Guideline F, he has gained control of the mental disorders that contributed to his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, paid or made payment arrangements for his delinquent medical 
bills, and has disputed an $18 medical bill that is insignificant from a national security 
viewpoint. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
January 2010 and received a discharge in April 2010 (SOR ¶ 4.a), and has six 
delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 4.b-4.g.) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an appellant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s financial record establishes two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a 
history of not meeting financial obligations. Security concerns based on financial 
considerations may be mitigated by any of the following conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
16 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; or  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant’s delinquent debts have been numerous and 
some are not fully resolved. However, his past impulsiveness and inattention were due 
at least in part to his ADHD and PDD, which are unusual circumstances. The medical 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 4.b and 4.g were referred for collection before Applicant began 
taking medication. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 4.c, 4.e, and 4.f were referred for 
collection at about the time Applicant first began taking medication. All the debts were 
delinquent well before he began seeing his psychologist and the dosage of his 
medication was increased to its current level, which is almost double the initial dosage. 
For these reasons and the reasons set out in the above discussions of AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 
41(a), I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) is established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s financial problems leading to his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy were due in part to impulsive and inattentive financial 
management. However, the medical bills alleged in the SOR are attributable to the 
medical care and special services required by his three stepchildren. He has acted 
responsibly regarding his medical bills by staying in contact with the creditor and making 
payment arrangements for three medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 4.b, 4.e, and 4.g. He 
successfully disputed the medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 4.d. He has challenged the $18 
medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 4.f. The dispute regarding SOR ¶ 4.f is not resolved, but 
the small amount involved makes it of minimal security significance. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Applicant received financial counseling in May 2009 
and November 2009, and his remaining delinquent debts are being resolved. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant paid the delinquent satellite television bill 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 4.c, successfully disputed the medical debt in SOR ¶ 4.d, and 
negotiated payment arrangements for the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 4.b, 4.e, and 
4.g. The $18 medical bill is not resolved. However, an applicant is not required, as a 
matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 
17 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 4.d. It is not 
established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 4.f. The remaining debts alleged in the SOR 
were not disputed.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines K, M, E, and F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is an intelligent well-educated adult. He was candid, sincere, credible, 
calm, and focused at the hearing. He has struggled with ADHD and PDD during most of 
his working life. He realized that he needed help when he sought counseling and 
treatment for his stepchildren. He has obtained treatment, and his current employer has 
not observed the behaviors that the SOR reflects. His psychologist’s analysis indicates 
that he needs some special considerations from his supervisors, but his supervisors 
have demonstrated by word and deeds that they are willing to work with him. During the 
15 months preceding the hearing, he gained a reputation as a talented, trustworthy, and 
reliable employee. He is no longer the troubled and dysfunctional person portrayed in 
the SOR. 
 
 The SOR did not allege security concerns under Guideline I (Psychological 
Conditions). To the contrary, Department Counsel argued that evidence of Applicant’s 
ADHD, PDD, and anxiety was irrelevant. I have concluded that the evidence of his 
ADHD and PDD is relevant and that it, along with other considerations, mitigates the 
security concerns set out in the SOR. I have also noted that any security concerns 
raised by Applicant’s ADHD and PDD would be mitigated under AG ¶¶ 29(a) and (b), 
because they are treatable, Applicant has complied with his treatment program, and he 
has received a favorable prognosis from his psychologist.  
 
18 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines K, M, 
E, and F, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of 
my obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns based on handling protected information, use of 
information technology systems, personal conduct, and financial considerations. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K (Handling Protected Information): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M (Use of IT Systems):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.f:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a-4.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
