 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-11283    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant admittedly purchased and 
used illegal drugs with varying frequency between 2004 and July 2010. His two years of 
abstinence are insufficient to mitigate his six-year history of drug use. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons2 (SOR) 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 The SOR is undated.  
 
2 
 
explaining that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR, which detailed the 
reasons for the action under the drug involvement guideline, recommended the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination to revoke or deny Applicant’s 
access to classified information.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned 
to me on February 7, 2012. The hearing took place as scheduled on April 2, 2012. At 
hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were also admitted 
without objection. After the hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted AE C and D, which were also admitted without 
objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 10, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, an unmarried 25-year-old with no children, has worked as a federal 
contractor since May 2009. He has been with his current employer since January 2011 
working as an electronics technician. This is his first security clearance application.3  
 
 In 2004, while in high school, Applicant began to use illegal drugs. Initially he 
used nitrous oxide. By 2007, his drug use expanded to include marijuana, cocaine, and 
Percocet. In 2008, he began to use LSD and ecstasy. Applicant admits that on occasion 
he purchased drugs for his personal use; other times he used drugs provided by his 
friends. Applicant and his friends used drugs in social settings such as camping trips 
and house parties. Applicant continued to use illegal drugs when he began his 
employment as a federal contractor on a military base in May 2009. Although he 
realized his drug use was illegal, he did not believe there was any company policy that 
prohibited off-duty drug use. He never reported to work under the influence of drugs, nor 
does he believe his drug use negatively impacted his job.4  
 
 Applicant last used illegal drugs in July 2010 primarily because it stopped being 
fun and he did not believe the behavior was compatible with his future success. He cited 
as a secondary factor the drug-related deaths of several of his high school classmates, 
including his childhood best friend in January 2012. Applicant classifies his prior drug 
use as youthful experimentation, never rising to a level that required intervention or 
treatment. He continues to spend time with some of the friends he used drugs with in 
the past, although he claims that he has not witnessed any drug use by them in the past 
couple of years. At hearing, Applicant expressed his intent not to use drugs in the 
future. He also stated in his Answer that he would be willing to sign a statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation; however, he did not 
submit any such statement.5  
                                                          
3 Tr. 20-21; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 21-30. 
 
5 Tr. 17, 29-32, 35-39; Answer; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 In the time Applicant has worked for his current employer, he has performed well. 
His supervisor sees a well of potential in Applicant and believes that Applicant just 
needs more encouragement to fully develop that potential. He believes Applicant has 
shown good judgment in the performance of his duties and Applicant’s performance 
review reflects his supervisor’s statements. Applicant has also enrolled in college and 
completed his first semester with good grades.6  
 
Policies  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
                                                          
6 Tr. 41; AE A, C, D. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern related to drug involvement is explained in AG ¶ 24. 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willing to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 25, two disqualifying conditions are applicable to this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of any drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Applicant admits to purchasing and using illegal drugs as well as abusing 
prescription drugs with varying frequency, between 2004 and July 2010.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 267 apply. Applicant’s six-
year history of drug use is too recent to be mitigated by two years of abstinence. 
Although, Applicant stated intent not to use drugs in the future, his statements are 
undercut by the casual attitude he displayed when discussing his prior drug use. His 
attitude reveals that he does not fully grasp the seriousness of the illegality of his 
conduct or its potential security ramifications. This became even more evident as he 
discussed his recreational drug use while working as federal contractor, albeit without a 
                                                          
7 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
 (1)  disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
  
 (2)  changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
   
 (3)  an appropriate period of abstinence; 
   
 (4)  a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness during which these drugs 
were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to 
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis 
by a duly qualified medical professional. 
 
 
5 
 
security clearance. Even as Applicant discussed his reasons behind his decision to stop 
using drugs, he focused more on the absence of fun formerly associated with the 
activity versus the serious and personal implications of losing friends and former 
classmates because of drug overdoses. Also, his social circle still includes some of the 
people with whom he used drugs in the past.  
 
Given Applicant’s recent history of drug use, I have reservations about his ability 
to protect classified information at this time. In reaching this conclusion, I have also 
considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. During his two years of abstinence, 
Applicant has taken some positive steps towards building a responsible lifestyle. He has 
decided to attend college and is performing well academically and professionally. 
However, he has not maintained a sufficient period of abstinence to warrant a favorable 
decision. However, this should not be construed as a determination that Applicant 
cannot or will not, at some time in the future, be able to demonstrate a sufficient period 
of abstinence to justify the granting of a security clearance.  
 
The award of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime occurrence, but is 
based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence 
presented. A clearance is not recommended with the Applicant’s current circumstances, 
but should he be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the 
future, having demonstrated a longer period of abstinence and greater understanding of 
the negative security implications of any illegal drug use, he may well demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not 
warranted. 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
