Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-4, hearing exhibit (HE) I, and Applicant exhibits1
A-G.
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXX, Xxxxx Xxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 11-12434
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I grant Applicant’s clearance.1
On 7 March 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely answered2
the SOR, requesting a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 18 April 2012, and I
convened a hearing 15 May 2012. DOHA received the transcript 23 May 2012.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, and 2.a. He denied the
remaining SOR allegations. He is a 47-year-old linguist employed by defense
contractors since August 2010. He seeks reinstatement of the interim security clearance
he obtained in July 2010.
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in June 1964. In 1981, Applicant’s family fled
Afghanistan in the wake of the Soviet invasion. Applicant’s parents were on vacation in
India when a cousin convinced them not to return to Afghanistan. Applicant did not have
an Afghan passport, and he could not obtain one because he had not completed his
compulsory military service, so he and several unrelated friends walked over the
mountains into Pakistan. In Pakistan, he bought a fake Afghan passport and traveled to
India to meet up with his parents. In India, Applicant’s family obtained political asylum to
immigrate to the U.S. When Applicant arrived in the U.S., immigration officials
confiscated his fake Afghan passport. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in June
1988. He obtained his most recent U.S. passport in January 2005. Applicant obtained
an undergraduate degree in electrical engineering technology from a U.S. university in
July 1987.
Applicant’s wife, who is also a native-born Afghan, immigrated to the U.S. in
1984, when she was 12 years old. They married in September 1990. She is a legal
permanent resident (LPR) of the U.S., and is eligible for her U.S. citizenship. However,
she has only recently begun the application process (AE C) because she and Applicant
could not afford the application fees. They have two sons born in the U.S. in September
1994 and June 2009. Applicant owns his home in the U.S. and all his financial interests
are here.
Applicant’s mother-in-law is dead. His father-in-law abandoned his family in the
U.S. and returned to Afghanistan in 2002. He married another woman and began
another family before his wife in the U.S. died. He was not divorced. Applicant has had
little or no contact with his father-in-law since he left the U.S. in 2002. Applicant’s wife is
completely estranged from her father. Neither Applicant nor his wife have any
immediate family in Afghanistan, although they have extended family there. Applicant
traveled to Afghanistan January-February 2005 and March-April 2007 to visit family.
From mid-2006 to the end of 2009, Applicant worked as a web-designer and
videographer for a company he and his wife set up in his wife’s name to do free-lance
work on a contract basis. His company was hired to videotape press conferences,
ceremonies, and interviews involving notable Afghanis for another company to
broadcast these events in Afghanistan. Applicant videotaped events at the White
House, the Pentagon, Congress, the Army Academy, the Afghan and Greek embassies,
as well hotels where the dignitaries were staying (AE A). Applicant only videotaped the
events; the company that hired him controlled any editorial content. As a result of some
of these contacts, Applicant receives occasional email newsletters from the Afghan
embassy.
3
 Some of the companies Applicant produced websites for also hired him to
produce commercials for the products and services provided by the companies. The
companies themselves are—like Applicant’s company—U.S. companies owned by
Afghan-Americans. One of the companies markets telephone calling cards to call
Afghanistan and other countries in the region. None of the companies is conducting
business in Afghanistan.
Applicant has an Afghan-American friend who returned to Afghanistan in 2005 to
pursue a career as a popsinger. Applicant traveled to Afghanistan in October-November
2005 to shoot some music videos for his friend. He also traveled to Afghanistan in
August-September 2006 and October 2006 to shoot video of the improved conditions in
Afghanistan. He markets the video on his website in the U.S. to show his impressions of
progress in Afghan society.
Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic and emerging democracy. With the support of
the U.S. and other nations, the new government endeavors to build a new system of
government and to rebuild the country’s infrastructure. The Army and police force are
well trained. The government continues to face significant challenges from insurgents
and terrorist organizations supported by the ousted Taliban as well as Al Qa’ida, but
actively seeks to eliminate both with the assistance of the U.S. and NATO. The new
government is also working to reverse a long legacy of serious human rights abuses,
but serious problems remain. Afghanistan is now an active member of the international
community, has signed a “Good Neighbor” declaration with six nations bordering it, and
promotes regional cooperation. The U.S. supports the emergence of a broad-based
government in Afghanistan. Afghanistan continues to seek U.S. support as it moves
forward towards democracy and stability. It is not known to be an active collector of
intelligence information.
The SOR also alleges that Applicant falsified his September 2010 clearance
application by failing to disclose a September 2008 federal income tax lien (SOR 2.a)
and a 180-day delinquent account (SOR 2.b). The record reflects that when Applicant
completed his application inputs in August 2010, he was unaware of the allegedly-
delinquent account, and had demonstrated to the Internal Revenue Services’ (IRS)
satisfaction that the lien had been erroneously filed. Applicant’s September 2010 credit
report (GE 4) reflected that the allegedly-delinquent account was first reported in August
2010. The credit report also reflected that Applicant’s IRS issue had been resolved in
March 2009. Finally, when Applicant later applied for upgraded access, he noted the
earlier missing information on his application (AE E).
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
AG ¶ 6.4
AG ¶ 7(a).5
4
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information4
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  In5
addition, security concerns may be raised by connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
AG ¶ 7(b).6
AG ¶ 7(e).7
A factor the Appeal Board has recently acknowledged as a legitimate factor for consideration in Guideline8
B cases. See, ISCR Case No. 07-00034 (5 February 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-02511 (20 March 2007).
5
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  Finally,6
security concerns may be raised by a substantial business, financial, or property interest
in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.7
In this case, the Government failed to establish a case for disqualification under
Guideline B. Considering first the country involved, on balance Afghanistan and the U.S.
enjoy good foreign relations. It has not been demonstrated that the Afghan government
is actively engaged in the collection of U.S. intelligence which would make Applicant or
his family likely targets for coercion, duress, or influence. The government’s evidence
explains the links to terrorism that are on-going in Afghanistan and the way that those
terrorist organizations operate, the increase in terrorism, and the increase in
membership in terrorist groups. Several of the groups that are frequently in the news,
for example the Taliban and Al Qa’ida, operate in Afghanistan and practice terrorist acts
against Afghan and U.S. forces as well as indiscriminate violence in order to draw
attention to themselves and increase their membership and their power. There is no
indication they use terrorism to gain access to U.S. information.
Considering Applicant’s circumstances, the Government produced no evidence
that there was a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion because of Applicant’s limited contacts in Afghanistan. None of
Applicant’s Afghan contacts have any direct connection to the Afghan government, and
there is nothing in his connection to them to raise a concern over protecting classified
information. The information technology (IT) business conducted by Applicant and his
wife from 2006-2009 was conducted only in the U.S. by their U.S. company. The
companies they worked for were U.S. companies, owned by Afghan-Americans, who
conducted their business in the U.S. to Afghan ex-patriates.
Similarly, none of Applicant’s connections raise any potential conflict of interest.
He owes no obligation to any Afghan person or entity. Further, he has been in the U.S.
more than 30 years. His wife and children are here. All his financial interests are here,
to include the business he and his wife ran from 2006-2009. His contacts with family
members and his friend in Afghanistan range from nearly non-existent to casual, and
there is nothing in the circumstances of their being in Afghanistan, or in Applicant’s
contacts with them, to heighten the risk that he could be impelled or compelled to
provide protected information to Afghanistan. Finally, Applicant has served with U.S.
forces in Afghanistan, essentially producing classified intelligence for those forces and
protecting U.S. interests.  Essentially, he is the source of the information to be8
protected. None of the other disqualifying conditions are implicated by the facts in this
6
case. Under these circumstances, I conclude that it is unlikely Applicant can be
pressured based on his family members in Afghanistan or his friend in Pakistan.
Accordingly, I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
The Government also failed to establish a case for disqualification under
Guideline E. Applicant lacked either the knowledge or the intent to mislead the
Government about his financial situation, which in any event never amounted to a
financial concern. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Formal Findings
   Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs a-h: For Applicant
   Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs a-b: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
