 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13529 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 16, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 3, 2012. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on April 6, 2012, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on April 25, 2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through C at the hearing, which were admitted into evidence without objection. His 
exhibit list was marked as HE II. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. Applicant submitted AE D through F, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 3, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. Those admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 70-year-old president of a defense contractor company (Co. 2). He 
started Co. 2 in 2005. He has a master’s degree in engineering. He is married, with two 
adult children. His wife does not work. He retired from the U.S. Air Force as a lieutenant 
colonel. He receives both monthly military retirement and social security payments. He 
has held a security clearance in the past, but he does not currently hold one.1  
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts, two tax liens, and two judgments. The 
total of all his delinquent obligations is $600,112. The debts were listed on credit reports 
obtained on March 28, 2009, and November 15, 2011.2  
 
 From June 1995 through October 2005, Applicant was the president and CEO of 
a government contractor business (Co. 1). Co. 1 contracted with other government 
agencies (OGAs) installing security services throughout the world. Applicant relied on 
these various government-funded contracts to keep his business operating. Because 
the contract payments by the OGAs to Co. 1 were delayed, Applicant hired a “factoring” 
credit agency to supply a steady cash flow on a monthly basis. In return, the factoring 
company would receive Co. 1’s accounts receivables at some specified rate. During 
2005, Co. 1 was working on an overseas contract that was significantly delayed. Co. 1 
was to earn approximately $500,000 upon completion of the contract. The factoring 
company became concerned that Co. 1 would not complete the contract and thus not 
receive the contract payments. As a result, a receiver was appointed for Co. 1 and a 
Chapter 11 voluntary bankruptcy petition was filed in November 2005. In January 2007, 
the case was converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. At that time, court filings showed 
that Co. 1’s assets were about $596,000 and its liabilities were over $ 7 million. 
Applicant had personally guaranteed many of the loans of Co. 1. Consequently, even 
though Co. 1 was discharged from its liabilities through the bankruptcy, Applicant was 
personally responsible for those loans he guaranteed. Applicant was able to pay several 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6; GE 1, 9. 
 
2 GE 7-8. 
 
 
3 
 
of the loan guarantee debts totaling more than $100,000 and those debts are not listed 
in the SOR.3  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is federal tax lien in the amount of over $397,000. 
This debt was incurred by Co. 1 because it failed to pay payroll taxes for several 
quarters in 2005. Applicant did not realize at the time the taxes were not being paid. He 
has been working with the IRS to resolve this issue. He proposed an “offer in 
compromise” in October 2010. Since that time, he has paid $500 monthly payments to 
the IRS for a total of about $9,000. The IRS is still in the process of considering his offer 
in compromise, which is to pay $48,000 to settle the $397,000 tax debt. This debt is 
unresolved.4 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f have been paid. These debts are 
resolved.5 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h, and 1.j are all debts Applicant incurred as 
a result of his personal guarantee of Co. 1’s debts. He admitted to owing these debts. 
He contacted the creditor and it agreed to settle the debts if he paid 60 percent on a 
balance of $40,000. He is considering the settlement offer. These debts are unresolved. 
The debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.i was a duplicate debt and is resolved in favor of Applicant.6 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e is another debt personally guaranteed by 
Applicant from Co. 1 in the amount of $8,810. The creditor was willing to settle this debt 
for $2,400 at one time, but Applicant did not have the funds to do so then. He recently 
contacted the creditor to reengage in settlement discussions. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.k are judgments in the respective 
amounts of about $28,797 and $80,042. These were also debts incurred by Co. 1, 
which Applicant personally guaranteed. The creditor for the debt at ¶ 1.g has not been 
contacted and that debt is unresolved. The creditor for the debt at ¶ 1.k offered to settle 
the debt for $25,000, but Applicant did not engage in settlement discussions. This debt 
is also unresolved.8 
 
 Applicant started Co. 2 in 2005 to engage in the same type of business as Co. 1 
had been doing. He has built the business by obtaining contracts with OGAs. He has 14 
full-time employees of the company. Co. 2 currently has about $200,000 in the bank 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 24, 39-40, 45-46 22; GE 5-6, 9-10. 
 
4 Tr. at 48-52; GE 9; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 58-59, 63; See Answer. 
 
6 Tr. at 59-61, 64-68; GE 7-8. 
 
7 Tr. at 62-63; GE 7-8; AE D-E. 
 
8 Tr. at 63-66; GE 7-8. 
 
 
4 
 
and was just awarded a government contract for about $96,000. He currently draws a 
salary of $72,000 from the company. From September 2005 until January 2011, he did 
not take a salary.9   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 26, 53, 66. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is delinquent on taxes owed to the IRS, has two judgments against 
him, and owes on the remaining debts described above. Therefore, he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent taxes, judgments, and debts are unresolved and ongoing. 
He has started a new business, but not addressed many of his financial problems. 
Similar financial problems will recur, since he is still in the same type of business that 
originally incurred the debts. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant made a business decision to personally guarantee the loans that Co. 1 
incurred. Also, as president and CEO of Co. 1 he was responsible to ensure that the 
payroll taxes were properly paid. These were not financial conditions beyond his control. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling and although a few debts were paid, 
the larger obligations remain unpaid, with no firm settlement plan in place. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debts that were paid. At this point, Applicant’s 
finances remain a concern despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s service to his country as a Vietnam veteran and a retired 
Air Force officer. I have considered his contractor work for the Government. However, I 
also considered that his previous business went bankrupt with over $7 million worth of 
liabilities. He personally guaranteed some of that debt. Although he has made some 
 
7 
 
progress on reducing the guaranteed debts, a substantial amount remains including 
almost $400,000 in unpaid payroll taxes. His past financial track record reflects a 
troublesome financial history that causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1c:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g – 1h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j – 1k:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
