 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00092 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David L. Evans, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on February 23, 2006. On May 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 9, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 3, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2008. On August 13, 2008, a Notice 
of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for September 9, 2008. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 - 2, which 
were admitted without objection. The Government requested that administrative notice 
be taken of one document with 7 attachments. The document was marked as Hearing 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibit 1 (Hearing Ex 1) without objection. Applicant testified and submitted eight 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – H without objection. 
Applicant also called three witnesses on her behalf. DOHA received the transcript of 
hearing on September 18, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Cuba is a totalitarian state led by acting president Raul Castor, Fidel Castro’s 
brother. Cuba’s totalitarian regime controls all aspects of life through the communist 
party and its affiliated mass organizations, the government bureaucracy, and the 
Ministry of the Interior. The government continues to commit serious human rights 
abuses and denies citizens the right to change their government.  
 
The U.S. and Cuba have a strained relationship and the U.S. does not have full 
diplomatic relations with Cuba. The U.S. has a broad trade embargo against Cuba. 
Americans traveling to Cuba must first obtain a license to engage in any travel-related 
transactions related to travel to, from, and within Cuba. While the U.S. maintains 
sanctions against Cuba, it also supports the Cuban people through humanitarian efforts 
and continues to work for a “Free Cuba.”  
 
Cuba has been on the U.S. State Department’s list of State Sponsors of 
Terrorism since 1982. Cuba publically opposed the U.S.’s global war on terrorism and 
has not undertaken any counterterrorism efforts. Cuba maintains a close relationship 
with Iran and Syria, and has offered safe havens for members of terrorist organizations.  
 
The Castro regime has long targeted the United States for intensive espionage 
activities. Since the 1980’s there have been numerous reported cases of Cuban 
government sanctioned and supported espionage against the United States. 
 
(All sources for the above information are contained in Hearing Exhibit 1.)   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated June 9, 2008, Applicant denies SOR allegation 
1.a and admits to all remaining SOR allegations. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old senior mechanical engineer employed with a 
Department of Defense contractor. She has worked for her current employer since 
December 2005. She has a Bachelor of Science degree in physics, a Masters degree in 
optics, a PhD in Materials Science, and a PhD in Optics. She recently married in May 
2008 and has no children. The SOR was amended to reflect her married name. This is 
her first time applying for a security clearance. (Tr at 54, 60-63; Gov 1; AE E.)   
 
Applicant was born and raised in Cuba. When she lived in Cuba, she resided 
with her step-grandfather, her maternal grandmother, and her parents. Her parents 
 
3 
 
 
divorced when she was nine, and her father moved out of the house. Applicant has a 
half brother from her mother’s subsequent relationship. (Tr at 54, 56; Gov 2; Answer to 
SOR.)  
 
Applicant’s step-grandfather was a freedom fighter. He was sentenced to nine 
years in jail in 1961. He served seven and half years in prison. In the early 1990s, her 
step-grandfather sought political asylum from the U.S. In 1992, his application for 
political asylum was granted. Her step-grandfather and the family members living in his 
household were allowed to immigrate to the U.S. In 1995, the family moved to the U.S. 
The household included Applicant, her mother, her step-grandfather, her maternal 
grandmother, her uncle, and her half brother. (Tr at 55-59; Answer to SOR; Gov 2.)  
 
Applicant was 16 when she moved to the U.S. She attended high school and 
graduated as the class valedictorian. She completed undergraduate and graduate 
degrees at U.S. universities. One of her PhD’s was awarded from a French university 
but she studied for it in conjunction with her PhD that was awarded from a U.S. 
university. (Tr at 54, 61-62; Gov 2; AE E.)  
 
On November 10, 2004, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. She applied for 
citizenship as soon as she had the opportunity. She was very proud to be given the 
opportunity to be granted the rights and privileges of a U.S. citizen.  She does not 
consider herself to be a dual citizen of the U.S. and Cuba.  She owns no property and 
has no benefits from Cuba. Her mother, half brother, and uncle have become U.S. 
citizens. (Tr at 64-66, 81; Gov 2.)   
 
Applicant’s father, paternal grandmother, half-sister, and one-month old half 
brother are citizens of and reside in Cuba. Her father is a sales representative for a 
German construction equipment company. Her grand-mother is retired. Her half-sister is 
a high school student. She telephones her father and/or grandmother on a monthly 
basis. She also has several extended family members (aunts, uncles, cousins) who 
reside in Cuba. None of her family members are associated with the Cuban 
government. (Tr at 68-69; 82; Gov 2.)   
 
Applicant visited family members in Cuba in 1999, 2000, 2002 and 2004. All of 
the trips were authorized by the Office of Foreign Assets Control, U.S. Department of 
the Treasury. She traveled with her maternal grandmother to visit family members. The 
duration of each visit was approximately two weeks. She was a Cuban citizen when she 
traveled to Cuba and used her Cuban passport. (Tr at 66, 77-78; Gov 2; Answer to 
SOR.)   
 
After she completed her PhD studies in 2005, her mother offered to pay for 
Applicant to visit family members in Cuba as a graduation present.  In August 2005, 
Applicant renewed her Cuban passport in anticipation of this trip. The Cuban 
government requires Cuban citizens, including Cuban citizens who have immigrated to 
other countries, to use a Cuban passport when traveling to Cuba. She never pursued 
the trip after she accepted the job with a defense contractor. She never used the 
 
4 
 
 
renewed Cuban passport. She has not traveled to Cuba since becoming a U.S. citizen. 
She does not intend to travel back to Cuba but will if relations between the U.S. and 
Cuba become normalized and Cuba becomes a non-restricted country. (Answer to 
SOR.)   
 
Applicant was not aware of the concerns raised by possessing a foreign passport 
while holding a security clearance. Once she discovered the concern, she invalidated 
the passport in front of her Facility Security Officer. She presented the destroyed 
passport during the hearing.  She is aware that invalidating the Cuban passport might 
result in her never seeing her family members residing in Cuba again. She has never 
told her Cuban relatives about the nature of her work or her place of employment. (Tr at 
67-69, 76; Answer to SOR.)     
 
Applicant’s new husband is a citizen of France. They met while studying for their 
doctorates at a U.S. university.  He has lived in the U.S. since 2001. He currently works 
as an optical engineer for a U.S. company. He currently has an H1B work visa and is in 
the process of applying for permanent residence (i.e. green card.) (Tr at 82; Answer to 
SOR.)  
 
Several superiors and co-workers from Applicant’s company testified on her 
behalf.  She has impressed her superiors with her knowledge and strong work ethic. 
The Vice President of Science and Technology of the company has worked in the 
defense and aerospace industry for 30 years. He is also a Brigadier General in the 
United States Air Force Reserves. Prior to being recently promoted to headquarters, he 
was the former Director of Sensor Technology at the location where Applicant is 
employed. He was in charge of the programs Applicant worked on. Applicant worked 
with him for two and half years. They traveled together on business trips and had many 
conversations together. He states Applicant is very honest and adheres to the strict 
rules pertaining to international traffic and arms regulation as well following the 
procedures to protect the sensitive technology of the company. (Tr at 46-52.) 
 
The technical director and missionary at Applicant’s company testified. He has 
worked in the defense industry since 1968. Applicant works in the research area. He is 
familiar with her work and has no cause to question her honesty. He notes she is very  
professional. Her papers, proposals and interaction with others are outstanding. He has 
a lot of confidence in Applicant. (Tr at 39-45.)  
 
An electro optics engineer who works in another branch of research department 
met Applicant in undergraduate physics class in 1999. They have been friends for nine 
years. She came to work for the company before Applicant. When an opening came up 
in the company she recommended Applicant for the position because she was aware of 
her educational background and intelligence.  While working at the company, they have 
worked together on various projects but do not work in the same office. She states that 
Applicant is “impeccably honest and very committed.” She socializes with Applicant and 
her family. She estimated she socializes with Applicant about four times a year. It used 
to be more often but their lives are much busier. Applicant has spoken to her about her 
 
5 
 
 
family members in Cuba a minimal amount. She is aware that Applicant’s father is 
remarried and that her stepsister is a teenager. She does not know their names. She 
has never heard Applicant express any concern for their well-being in Cuba. (Tr at 30-
38.) 
 
Applicant’s contribution to the company was recently featured in the company 
magazine. (AE F.) Her curriculum vitae reveals that she has received several honors 
and awards, has authored numerous articles, and has had her research referenced in 
numerous journals and proceedings. (AE E.)  
 
 Applicant’s family was treated harshly by the Cuban government. After her 
grandfather applied for political asylum, her mother was fired from her job as a math 
teacher.  Her family is strongly against Castro’s regime. Her mother and grandfather 
sacrificed a lot so that she and her half-brother could have a future in the U.S. She 
would never dishonor them. She loves the U.S. and feels blessed to have the 
opportunity to come to the U.S.  If granted a security clearance, she will never violate 
the trust the U.S. government has placed in her. (Tr at 56-59, 69-70.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG &9:       
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.    
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC)10(a) (exercise of any 
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or 
through foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) 
possession of a current foreign passport); and FP DC ¶ 10(b) (action to acquire or 
obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen) apply. Applicant 
renewed her Cuban passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. The passport was renewed 
on August 30, 2005 and did not expire until August 29, 2011. She renewed her Cuban 
passport in order to visit family members in Cuba.  Renewing a foreign passport after 
becoming a U.S. citizen is considered an exercise of foreign citizenship.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Foreign Influence. The following Foreign Influence Mitigating 
Conditions (FI MC) apply: 
 
 
7 
 
 
FP MC ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated) applies. Applicant was unaware that 
possessing a foreign passport would be an issue related to her security clearance. She 
renewed her Cuban passport because the government of Cuba requires all of its 
citizens, including those who have immigrated to other countries, to use Cuban 
passports while traveling to Cuba. Applicant destroyed her Cuban passport in front of 
her Facility Security Officer and presented the destroyed passport during the hearing. 
FP MC ¶ 11(e) applies. It is noted that Applicant never traveled to Cuba after renewing 
her Cuban passport. She understands that by destroying her Cuban passport she may 
never see her family members living in Cuba again.    
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference concerns. Guideline C is found 
for Applicant. 
  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG &6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Of the Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC), the following apply 
to Applicant’s case. 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(c) (contact with a family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion) applies because Applicant’s father, paternal grandmother, half-sister and half-
brother are citizens of and reside in Cuba. 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group or country by providing that information) applies for the same reason.  Applicant’s 
relationship with her family members in Cuba create a potential conflict of interest 
 
8 
 
 
between her obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and her desire to 
help her family members residing in Cuba.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Foreign Influence. The following Foreign Influence Mitigating 
Conditions (FI MC) apply to Applicant’s case.  
 
FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, or government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest) applies.  While Applicant has a relationship with her relatives who 
reside in Cuba, she is closest to the family members who reside in the U.S. She grew 
up in her maternal grandparents’ home. Her father moved out of the house after her 
parents divorced when she was nine-years-old. She immigrated to the U.S. in 1995. 
She completed her high school education in the U.S. She graduated from U.S. 
universities. She works for a U.S. company. Her significant personal and professional 
associates are located in the U.S. She owns no property in Cuba. 
 
 Although Applicant traveled to Cuba to visit family members prior to becoming a 
U.S. citizen, she has not traveled to Cuba since becoming a U.S. citizen in November 
2004. Upon destroying her passport, she accepts the possibility that she may never see 
her relatives who reside in Cuba again. Her closest family members, her mother, 
brother, uncle, step-father and maternal grandparents reside in the U.S. Applicant has 
resided in the U.S. for 13 years. She became a U.S. citizen four years ago. She is proud 
of her U.S. citizenship and the opportunities that she has been given. She does not take 
for the granted the rights she has as a U.S. citizen.       
 
Applicant’s close family ties, professional ties, and her future are located in the 
U.S. After weighing all of the evidence, considering Applicant’s testimony, and 
observing her demeanor at hearing, I am convinced that she would resolve any conflict 
in favor of the U.S.  
 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under 
Foreign Influence.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
 
9 
 
 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well-
educated, and intelligent woman who has a promising career ahead of her. She has 
been awarded her undergraduate, Masters and one PhD degree from U.S. universities. 
She has developed strong bonds in the U.S. The intensity of those bonds was apparent 
during the hearing based on the number of individuals who attended the hearing to 
show their support. While she has ties of affection to her paternal grandmother, father, 
and half-sister, and infant half-brother, who remain in Cuba, her closest family members 
reside in the U.S. Her presence and demeanor at hearing revealed that she takes her 
security responsibilities seriously.  After evaluating all of the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has carried her burden of mitigating the 
concerns raised under foreign influence and foreign preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
