1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-18345
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William Savarino, Esquire
September 21, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On January 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
B, K,and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on February 20, 2009, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
April 17, 2009. DOHA initially issued a notice of hearing on April 23 2009, and the
hearing was scheduled to be heard on June 24, 2009, in Honolulu, Hawaii. Because of
scheduling issues, the hearing was rescheduled, and a second notice of hearing was
issued on May 15, 2009. The hearing convened on July 24, 2009, in Honolulu, Hawaii.
 
2
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 10, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and he submitted Exhibits A through F,
which were entered without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr)
on August 10, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to South Korea.  The request and the attached documents were
admitted into evidence as Exhibit 10. Applicant’s counsel also submitted documents
regarding South Korea (Exhibit F), and I have reviewed and incorporated them also.
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 52 years old. He is married, and he has two children. His son and
daughter are U.S. citizens. He has received two Bachelor’s degrees, one in Business
Administration and one in Information Systems. Applicant was born in the United States.
He served in the United States Army from 1984 to 2004, and he received many
decorations, medals, and badges, as reviewed in Exhibit A, Applicant’s DD Form 214.
His family, including his mother, father, four brothers, and two sisters are all U.S. born
citizens, and they reside in the U.S. 
Applicant first lived in South Korea while he was in the U.S. Army. He continues
to live in South Korea, and works for a U.S. defense contractor there. Applicant has had
a a DoD security clearance since 1995, and he seeks to retain a DoD security clearance
in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence) 
The SOR lists 3 allegations under Adjudicative Guideline B. All of the allegations
will be discussed in the same order as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a.  Applicant’s wife, who is 48 year old, is a citizen and resident of South Korea.
Applicant met his wife in South Korea, while he served in the U.S. Army. They have
been married almost 18 years. He testified that it is his wife’s intention to become a
United States citizen, and she has begun the process of acquiring a green card and will
thereafter apply when appropriate to ger her U.S. citizenship. It is his plan for his family
to move back to the United States by the summer of 2010 (Tr at 47-48). Applicant’s wife
is not employed.
3
1.b. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of South Korea, and she is
60 or 62 years old. She lives with Applicant’s wife’s older sister. Applicant estimated that
he sees his mother-in-law every four months, although she was living with him and his
wife at one point in 2008. His wife talks to her once or twice a week, and he speaks to
her “hardly ever.” 
1.c. Applicant’s siblings-in-law, which includes two sisters and a brother of
Applicant’s wife, are citizens and residents of South Korea. Applicant’s brother-in-law
has his own construction business. Neither he nor his wife ever worked for the Korean
Government. Applicant’s older sister-in-law does not work. Her husband was in the
Republic of Korean (ROK) marines for 20 years and is now retired. He was a lieutenant
colonel before he retired in 2008. He is now a consultant for the marines. His younger
sister-in-law does not work and her husband is a salesman. Applicant’s contact with his
in-laws is infrequent. 
Applicant does not own any property in Korea. He deposits his paycheck in a
U.S. bank. He also has the assets of his 401k in the United States. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline K - Handling Protected Information) 
The SOR lists 2 allegations under Adjudicative Guideline K. The allegations will
be discussed in the same order as they were listed in the SOR:
2.a. On or about December 1 and 2, 2004, Applicant failed to properly secure
classified information, while employed in South Korea, in violation of Paragraph 6-9 of
Army Regulation 380-5.
Applicant explained the situation that resulted in this violation. He was working
with a coworker, making upgrades on laptop computers. Since they were not going to
finish in one day, his coworker suggested that they keep the computers working
throughout the night, so when they came back to work in the morning, the upgrades
would be complete. They secured the area, and did leave the computers running until
the next day. Applicant conceded that the correct course of action would have been to
secure the computers in a safe overnight, and begin working on them again the next
day. When his supervisor came in the next day, he questioned Applicant about the
computers. Applicant testified that he honestly explained to his supervisor what they
had done, and during an investigation that was held, he also cooperated and explained
his action. 
No unauthorized information was revealed as a result of Applicant’s conduct. As
a result of the investigation, Applicant received a written counseling statement. No other
punishment was meted out for this infraction, and Applicant testified that he has never
left the computers out of the safe at night after this incident (Tr at 65-77).
2.b. On or about April 1, 2005, Applicant failed to properly secure a security
container, while employed in South Korea, in violation of Army Regulation 380-5.
4
Applicant testified that this incident resulted when Applicant opened a secured
safe, and while the safe was still open, he moved about three feet into another room,
where he greeted a secretary. Another individual came into the room, and it did not look
like anyone was with the open safe, so he filed a report. He estimated that the safe was
unattended for a minute or less (Tr at 125). Applicant testified that, as a result of this
infraction, his punishment was to give a security course on base. He satisfied this
requirement. 
As stated above, Applicant has maintained a security clearance since 1995, and
he testified that the two violations described above are the only violations that he has
received from 1995 to the present, a span of 14 years (Tr at 64-65).
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
3.a. The Government alleges that Applicant’s security violation, as alleged in
paragraph 2, above exhibits questionable judgement and unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations. 
3.b. Applicant informed an investigator of the Department of Defense in an
affidavit, signed by him on February 4, 2008, that he had unintentionally left 10 to 12
classified hard drives in laptop computers overnight in December 2004. The SOR
alleges that Applicant failed to disclose that the hard drives were not secured because
Applicant was performing required system maintenance and did not want to stop the
process.  
Applicant testified that when the investigator asked him about these security
violations, specifically the one reviewed under 2.b., above, Applicant replied that it had
been four years earlier and he did not really have a good recollection of the event. The
investigator asked him whether the violation had been intentional or unintentional, and
Applicant answered unintentional. Applicant conceded that he had been in error, as he
had left the computers out of the safe for a specific purpose, to upgrade them. After his
memory was refreshed he realized his error. However, Applicant never denied to the
investigator that he had committed the act that was the subject of the violation (Tr at 85-
92). 
Mitigation
Applicant also offered into evidence three affidavits from individuals who know or
have known him in his professional life (Exhibit E). They all were extremely laudatory in
describing  Applicant as “defendable, reliable, honest and trustworthy.”
5
Status of South Korea 
South Korea is currently a stable democratic republic. The United States and
South Korea have been close allies since 1950, and have fought communism on the
Korean peninsula and in Vietnam. The United States, since 1950 and currently, has
thousands of U.S. military personnel stationed in South Korea, and  frequently conducts
joint military operations with South Korea. About 2.3 million Koreans live in the United
States. South Korea is the United States’ seventh largest trading partner. The South
Korean Government generally respects the human right of its citizens. South Korea has
a history of collecting protected U.S. information. However, as stated by President
Obama on April 2, 2009, “[South] Korea is one of Americas closest allies and greatest
friends.”
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
6
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
      Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying (DC). Those that could be applicable in this case include the following: (a)
“contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion”; and (d) “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” Applicant’s relatives, including his wife, mother-in-
law, and siblings-in-law, who are citizens and residents of South Korea make DC (a) a
concern to the Government. His wife, who is also a citizen and resident of South Korea,
and whose mother is both a citizen and resident of South Korea, make DC (d)
applicable.  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns (MC): (b) “there
is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to
the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
7
I find that MC (b) is applicable to this Applicant and controlling for the following
reasons: Applicant, who is 52 years old, was born in the United States and is a natural
born United States citizen. While he is married to a South Korean citizen, she is
planning to apply for U.S. citizenship when she is eligible.  The two children of Applicant
and his wife are being raised solely as U.S. citizens. Applicant served in the United
States Army from 1984 to 2004, during which he received many commendations and
awards. His immediate family, including his mother, father, three brothers, and two
sisters are all U.S. born citizens, and they reside in the U.S. Applicant has no assets in
South Korea, and his savings and 401(k) are in United States banking facilities.
Applicant does not have a close relationship with any of his relatives through
marriage, in South Korea. The evidence overwhelmingly suggests that Applicant has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that he can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Guideline K - Handling Protected Information
With respect to Guideline K, the Government has established that Applicant
committed two incidents of security violations, in 2004 and 2005.  His conduct comes
within the DC ¶ 34. (g) “failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or
other sensitive information.”
In reviewing the Mitigating Conditions (MC) under ¶ 35., I find that Applicant’s
violations occurred in 2004 and 2005, and are the only ones reported during the last 14
years, when Applicant has had a security clearance. I find that MC (a) “so much time
has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently, . . . that it is unlikely
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgement” is applicable.  I also find that  MC (b) “the individual now demonstrates
a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities” applies in this case.  
In this case, the Government has met its burden of proving that Applicant has
negligently failed to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified
information, which raises doubt about his trustworthiness, judgement, reliability and
willingness and ability to safeguard such information. However, since there have been
only two violations in 14 years, the last occurring in 2005, I find that these events have
been mitigated by time and infrequency, and Applicant has mitigated the Government's
concern against him. Accordingly, Paragraph 2, Guideline K of the SOR, is concluded
for Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, I find that Applicant’s security clearance violations
are not sufficient to come under DC ¶ (d) (3) because his pattern of rules violations do
not “support a whole-person assessment of untrustworthiness, unreliability, and
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.”  I also find that his statement made
to the investigator was not made in an attempt to mislead the Government. I resolve
Paragraph 3, Guideline E, for Applicant.
8
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.            
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines B, K, and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above as to why the Mitigating Conditions outweigh
the Disqualifying Conditions under each Guideline, the consideration of Applicant’s
twenty year service to the United States Army, and the strong letters of
recommendation, I find that the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
