 
 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 06-22946 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to sexual behavior, personal 
conduct, and criminal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SF-86) on January 30, 
2002. On February 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines D 
(sexual behavior), E (personal conduct), and J (criminal conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 20, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received his response on February 23, 
 
 2
2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 18, 2009, and I received 
the case assignment on May 21, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 30, 
2009, scheduling the hearing for June 10, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits, but did testify on his own 
behalf. I held the record open until June 26, 2009, to afford the Applicant an opportunity 
to submit additional evidence. Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, 
which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 17, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1 and 2 with explanations. He did 
not respond to SOR ¶ 3. The allegation in SOR ¶ 3 is cross-alleged with SOR ¶ 1 and 
reiterates the same conduct under two different security concerns. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant testified at his hearing, and I found his testimony to be credible. 
Moreover, I found him to be open and forthright throughout the entire process. 
 
Background Information 
   
Applicant is a 47-year-old senior safety engineer, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since June 1997. Tr.14, 16, GE 1. He has successfully held a secret 
level security clearance since 2002. Tr. 16.  
 
Applicant completed his undergraduate studies in May 1988, and was awarded a 
Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering. He attended a provisionally 
accredited law school part-time for the last four years and completed his course work for 
a Juris Doctorate in May 2009. As of the hearing date, Applicant’s law school had not 
issued grades for the final semester that ended in May 2009. Tr. 13-15. Applicant has 
never married and has an adopted 21-year-old son. Tr. 15-16, GE 1. 
 
This case centers on two separate incidents, the first alleged as a concern under 
Guideline D (sexual behavior), and the second alleged as a concern under Guideline E 
(personal conduct). The third allegation under Guideline J (criminal conduct) is cross-
alleged as the same incident under Guideline D. 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
 The conduct alleged under this concern states that Applicant was arrested in 
June 2000 and charged with three class two felony counts of child molestation. The 
allegation further states that Applicant was acquitted by a jury of all charges in 
November 2000. (SOR ¶ 1.a.)  
 
 
 3
                                                          
 In May 1996, Applicant began working at a church-operated homeless outreach 
center. Applicant was a member of a small staff. He worked in the kitchen and 
performed minor maintenance or “whatever needed to be done.” Tr. 20, GE 1. The 
outreach center served an economically disadvantaged community and provided a 
range of social services. The outreach center primarily served an adult population; 
however, a small percentage of the adults brought children to the center. Tr. 21-23.  
 
It was at the outreach center that Applicant met his adopted son (AS), who was 
eight years old at the time. AS’s mother was unable to care for AS. Applicant provided 
AS with a home during the week and ensured he received proper medical care and 
went to school. AS’s mother had a drug problem and was absent for significant periods 
of time. Applicant’s involvement with and responsibility for caring for AS increased over 
time and ultimately led to Applicant adopting AS, discussed infra. Tr. 24-25. Applicant 
continued to work at the outreach center until he began his present job in June 1997. 
GE 1, GE 3. 
 
 While at the outreach center, AS became friends with three other boys from 
similar backgrounds in his age group. AS asked Applicant if these three boys could 
spend time with AS at Applicant’s house. In October 1998 following a sleepover, the 
three boys accused Applicant of child molestation. The police and Child Protective 
Service (CPS) immediately investigated the allegations.1 Applicant adamantly denied 
the charges and opined that the boys were retaliating against him for scolding them for 
breaking wooden shutters in his house. Tr. 9, 27-31, GE 2, GE 3, GE 5. In October 
1998, Applicant received a letter from CPS advising him that “[t]he allegations of child 
abuse/neglect were invalid.” AE A.  
 
 The police and district attorney’s office subsequently presented the allegation of 
child molestation to the grand jury in August 1999, and the grand jury issued an 
indictment, charging Applicant with three charges of child molestation. GE 4. Neither the 
police nor district attorney attempted to serve the arrest warrant on Applicant. In June 
2000, Applicant received a call from the adoption agency advising him that he had an 
outstanding warrant against him. At this point, Applicant had been pursuing adoption 
proceedings for AS for two-and-one-half years. The adoption agency case worker 
discovered the pending arrest warrant against Applicant during a routine background 
check. Applicant immediately contacted his adoption attorney, who contacted the police 
department and notified the police that Applicant would self-surrender. Applicant was 
subsequently arrested, placed in jail, and released. Tr. 32-36, GE 2, GE 3, GE 6. In 
November 2000, his case went to trial and Applicant was acquitted by a jury of all 
charges against him.  
 
 The adoption agency completed its background investigation of Applicant as a 
prospective parent and favorably endorsed his petition. On December 30, 2004, the 
juvenile division of the superior court found Applicant to be “a fit and proper person to 
1 The government provided a copy of the arrest report/investigation, which contained the sordid 
details of the allegations the three boys made against the Applicant. GE 7. 
 
 
 4
adopt the minor child (AS); and the adoption would be in the child’s best interest and 
welfare” and granted Applicant’s petition to adopt AS. AE B. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The conduct alleged under this concern states that in April 2005, approximately 
30 photographs of nude, or partially clothed, juvenile males (ages 14-16) were 
discovered on Applicant’s workplace computer. (SOR ¶ 2.a.) 
 
 In April 2005, Applicant was summoned to his human resources office. Present 
were several company officials, including his supervisor, facility security officer, and 
human resources director. They showed Applicant the pictures as described supra, and 
asked him how those pictures got on his work computer. The company officials also 
reminded Applicant the photos violated company internet policy. At the time he was 
questioned by company officials, Applicant did not know how the pictures got there.  
 
He later surmised that the pictures, which were on his home computer, were 
transferred to his pocket pc while docking to download files as a back-up. He was 
unaware that his pocket pc also downloaded the “My Pictures” folder from his home 
computer and transferred stored photos from his pocket pc to his work computer while 
docking. Applicant was not aware the photos were on his work computer and did not 
view them while at work. Tr. 41-51, GE 3.  
 
 Applicant admitted that the pictures were his and fully cooperated with company 
officials during their investigation. The company officials advised Applicant he could 
keep his job as long as he sought outside counseling. Applicant was later informed that 
the local police department reviewed the photos and did not find anything illegal about 
them. Tr. 41-43. GE 3.  
 
 Applicant contacted his Employee Assistance Program and was referred to a 
counselor. Tr. 43. He eventually saw three different counselors. He acknowledged his 
having the photos on his computer was “wrong,” “inappropriate,” and he was “deeply 
sorry,” adding that he would never have intentionally placed the photos on his work 
computer. Tr. 46, 53, 61, 72. 
 
Applicant stated: 
 
At this point my life is an open book. The trial on charges of child 
molestation is a public record, and the incidents with the pictures of naked 
boys have been disclosed. I am content with who I am at this point, and 
there is nothing in my life that can be used to coerce or blackmail me. GE 
3. 
 
Applicant submitted a letter from his counselor, a psychiatric social worker, dated 
June 22, 2009. His counselor provided a positive report and stated Applicant is a “well 
rounded individual with a positive outlook on life and appropriate goals for the future of 
himself and his son.” AE C. 
 
 5
Criminal Conduct 
 
The conduct alleged under this concern cross-alleges the conduct involved in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. (SOR ¶ 3.a.) The facts outlined under the subheading Sexual Behavior 
supra are incorporated under this section. 
 
Character References 
 
Applicant submitted two work-related references. His facility security officer 
submitted an e-mail stating, “I am not aware of any activity by [Applicant] since March 
2006 (date he was hired at Applicant’s company), which would preclude him from 
maintaining his security clearance.” AE D. His human resources director submitted an 
e-mail stating, “I have no knowledge or record that [Applicant] has engaged in any 
inappropriate activity since an incident in 2005, (referring to the allegation in SOR ¶ 
2.a.) . . . which prompted an inquiry into his background. I am not aware of any present 
activity that would prevent [Applicant] from maintaining his security clearance.” AE E. 
Applicant stated that his company continues to support him. Tr. 9. 
 
Applicant provides ongoing support for his son. AS is completing his GED, and 
plans to continue his studies at community college. AS has a girlfriend of three years, is 
“very much into music,” and wants to do something with his band. AS’s mother works 
for a traveling carnival and AS speaks to her several times a week. Applicant has 
supported AS in locating his biological father and step-siblings. Tr. 78-79. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
 6
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Conclusions 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for sexual behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 7
 The Guideline delineates four disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 Whether or not a disqualifying condition is applicable under this concern depends 
on the validity of the allegations. More often than not, allegations of this nature have 
been adjudicated in a reliable venue and determined to be valid. In this case, the 
allegations of child molestation were thoroughly investigated and prosecuted. In 
October 1988, three boys from an outreach center made allegations that Applicant 
molested them during a sleepover that his adopted son had arranged. The police and 
CPS thoroughly investigated the allegations. In October 1988, CPS concluded the 
allegations of child abuse/neglect against Applicant were invalid.  
 In August 1999, the district attorney referred the matter to the grand jury and the 
grand jury issued an indictment of three felony counts of child molestation against 
Applicant. Nothing further happened until June 2000. In June 2000, Applicant received a 
call from a social worker from the adoption agency advising him there was an 
outstanding arrest warrant against him. Applicant immediately contacted the attorney 
handling his adoption for AS, who in turn contacted the police to arrange for a self 
surrender. Applicant was subsequently arrested and released. In November 2000, 
Applicant went to trial by jury on the three felony counts of child molestation and was 
acquitted of all charges.  
 The adoption agency subsequently completed its background check of Applicant 
and in December 2004, Applicant’s petition to adopt AS was granted. The court 
specifically found Applicant to be “a fit and proper person to adopt the minor child (AS).” 
Applicant adamantly and consistently denied the allegations against him. 
 To find against Applicant under this concern, I would have to substitute my 
judgment over CPS, the adoption agency, a jury of his peers, and, to a lesser extent, 
the superior court judge who found Applicant to be a fit parent and granted his request 
to adopt AS. CPS, the adoption agency, and the jury all had the opportunity to assess 
the accusers’ credibility. Unexplained are the significant delays from offense to 
indictment and arrest warrant to arrest. The pending felony arrest warrant was 
apparently discovered during Applicant’s background check in conjunction with his 
petition to adopt AS. Having evaluated all of the available facts under this concern, and 
 
 8
having had an opportunity to hear Applicant’s testimony, I do not find there to be a basis 
in fact to support the allegations contained in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
  Having concluded there is no basis in fact to support the allegations under this 
concern, a discussion of mitigating conditions is not warranted. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
The government established its case under Guideline E through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented that photos of nude, or partially clothed, juvenile 
males (ages 14-16) were discovered on his workplace computer in April 2005. 
 
Of the seven personal conduct disqualifying conditions listed under ¶ AG 15, two 
are potentially applicable: 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
 9
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 Applicant’s conduct violated company internet policy and the content of the 
photos had the potential to serve as a basis for exploitation or to cause him to be 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 16(d)(3), and 16(e) are 
applicable. 
 Of the seven personal conduct mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17, 
three are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
Although Applicant’s possession of the photos on his work computer was 
unintentional, he accepted responsibility for the photos being there and acknowledged 
that his behavior was inappropriate. At the time company officials confronted Applicant 
in April 2005, they advised him that they would be retain him as an employee if the 
photos were not illegal and he sought counseling. The police did not find the photos to 
be illegal and Applicant sought counseling. His counselor provided a favorable 
assessment of Applicant’s current well being. Four years have elapsed since the 
incident in question with no further recurrences. Applicant’s company officials are fully 
aware of the photo incident. Personal conduct mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 
and 17(e) are applicable. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for criminal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 10
                                                          
 The government cross-alleged the conduct involved in ¶ 1.a. under this concern. 
The analysis and comments contained in the subheading Sexual Behavior, supra, are 
incorporated under this subheading. 
  
Of the six criminal conduct disqualifying conditions listed under AG ¶ 31, two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 Applicant was charged with three felony counts of child molestation. He went to 
trial on these charges in November 2000. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) are applicable. 
Of the five criminal conduct mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 32, one is 
applicable:  
 
(d) evidence that the person did not commit the offense. 
 
Applicant was acquitted at a jury trial of all charges in November 2000. The 
analysis and comments contained in the subheading Sexual Behavior, supra, are 
incorporated under this subheading. AG ¶ 32(d) is applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
  In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, 
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”2 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) that are 
used for “whole person” analysis.  
 
 I have carefully considered seriousness of the overall conduct alleged. The 
comments contained under subheadings Sexual Behavior, Personal Conduct, and 
Criminal Conduct are incorporated under this section. As such, further discussion of the 
sexual behavior and criminal conduct concerns are not warranted. However, further 
discussion of personal conduct is appropriate. Weighing against Applicant is the 
conduct alleged under Personal Conduct. Applicant’s acquisition of the photos in 
question was problematic on several levels. It had the potential of exposing him to 
2 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
 
 11
                                                          
criminal liability and almost cost him his job. Also, the nature of the photos and their 
being on his workplace computer could have placed him in a compromising position.  
 
There is mitigating evidence that weighs in favor or granting Applicant’s security 
clearance. He promptly acknowledged that the photos were his and he fully cooperated 
with his employer to include seeking counseling. Applicant has worked for his defense 
contractor for 12 years and has successfully held a security clearance for seven years. 
Applicant adopted a disadvantaged youth and provided him with a positive environment. 
He is a home owner, has stable employment, and is a contributing member of society. 
Applicant’s human resources director and facility security officer did not disclose any 
adverse information precluding Applicant from being granted a security clearance. The 
evidence contains no derogatory record evidence about the Applicant. I considered 
Applicant’s character evidence, years of loyal and honorable service working for a 
defense contractor, his candor and cooperation throughout the security clearance 
process, and his potential for future service. 
  
This case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
under the facts presented. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and 
all the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns pertaining to sexual behavior, personal conduct, 
and criminal conduct.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a.:  For Applicant 
 
                  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraph 2.a.:  For Applicant 
 
                  Paragraph 3, Guideline J:  FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 3.a.:  For Applicant 
 
 
3See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 12
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
