1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 07-13547
SSN: -------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. The
action is based on psychological conditions, security violations, and foreign influence
security concerns. The security violations and foreign influence concerns are resolved in
Applicant’s favor. For the psychological conditions, it is undisputed that Applicant suffers
from bipolar disorder, and he has been under the care of a psychiatrist since 2005.
Applicant did not meet his burden to present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns raised by his bipolar disorder. Accordingly, as
explained in more detail below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Exhibit 6.  2
 Exhibit 7. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on December 17, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details
the factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline I for
psychological conditions, Guideline K for handling protected information, and Guideline
B for foreign influence. The SOR also recommended submitting the case to an
administrative judge for a determination to deny or revoke Applicant’s security-
clearance eligibility.  
Applicant answered the SOR on January 13, 2009, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to another administrative judge on April 14, 2009, and a hearing was
scheduled for May 19, 2009. The hearing was cancelled and the case was reassigned
to me on May 5, 2009. The hearing then took place as scheduled on June 16, 2009.
The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received June 24, 2009. 
Procedural Matters
Administrative or official notice was taken of certain facts concerning the country
of Malaysia as set forth in Department Counsel’s written request.  Also, administrative2
or official notice was taken of certain facts from the DSM-IV-R.3
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, the allegations
except for the allegation in SOR ¶ 3.b. His admissions are incorporated herein as
findings of fact. Based on the record as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 50-year-old software engineer. He has worked in the defense
industry, initially as a government employee and then as a defense contractor, since
1984. He has worked for the same company since 1998. His educational background
includes a master’s degree in electrical engineering. He is married to his second wife;
his first wife is deceased. He has two minor children from his current marriage.
 Exhibit 1.4
 Tr. 66.5
 Tr. 68.6
 Tr. 67. 7
 Exhibit 5. 8
3
Applicant has held a security clearance since about 1984. To retain a clearance,
he completed a security-clearance application in February 2007.  In doing so, he4
reported, among other things, (1) his involvement in a 2006 security incident, and (2)
that he was under the care of a psychiatrist for bipolar disorder since 2005.
In addition to those matters, Applicant disclosed during the security-clearance
process that his mother-in-law, sister-in-law, and nephew are citizens of Malaysia. His
wife was born in Malaysia, and she became a U.S. citizen in 1991. His mother-in-law
now lives in Malaysia, she is in her 70s, and Applicant describes her as “completely
illiterate” who has no connections to any Malaysian governmental agency.  Applicant5
and his wife do not provide financial support to her. Applicant’s sister-in-law is now
married to a U.S. citizen and lives in the U.S.  His sister-in-law has no connections to6
any Malaysian governmental agency. Applicant’s nephew is a citizen of and a resident
in Malaysia.  Applicant and his wife stay in contact with the nephew because he is an7
orphan, but their contact is limited. Applicant has not seen the nephew since 1995,
when he was eight years old. The communication is typically via e-mail on birthdays and
holidays. Applicant has no other connections with individuals in Malaysia, and he has no
business, financial, or property interests in Malaysia. 
Turning back to the 2006 security incident, the best evidence of this matter is the
disciplinary paperwork generated by Applicant's employer.  In summary, the employer8
found Applicant, who was the area information system security officer (ISSO), culpable
of a security violation because he performed an unauthorized electronic download and
subsequently removed classified data from a secure system and area. Initially, it was
believed that there was no classified data contained in the file. Later, it was determined
that the file did contain data that was classified. As alleged in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant, this matter involved two separate incidents. The first was when Applicant
connected a stand-alone unapproved PC to an approved stand-alone classified system
without permission. The second was when Applicant connected an uncertified PC to a
classified system without permission. As a result, the employer suspended Applicant
without pay for five days and warned him that any additional violations would result in
further disciplinary action, to include termination. The disciplinary paperwork indicates
no previous disciplinary actions, and the record contains no evidence of any other
security violation by Applicant. 
 See Exhibit 7 for information on bipolar disorder. 9
 Exhibit 4. 10
 Exhibit 4, p. 7.11
 Tr. 129–132.12
 Exhibit AA.13
4
Concerning bipolar disorder,  Applicant was first diagnosed with this condition in9
2005, when he sought help and treatment from a psychiatrist. The Agency referred
Applicant for an independent psychiatric evaluation in August 2008. The psychiatrist did
not appear as a witness, and so the facts below are derived from the written report.  In10
addition, a curriculum vitae or resume was not attached to the report or otherwise
offered as evidence, and so specific details about the doctor’s knowledge, skill,
experience, training, or education in the field of psychiatry in general and in treating
bipolar disorder are unknown. 
The diagnosis was bipolar I mixed moderate, and the Agency’s psychiatrist also
observed that Applicant was cutting his 500-mg medication in half and suggested
Applicant take the medication in three 250-mg pills to obtain the full benefit from the
medicine. The psychiatrist opined that Applicant was not stable so long as he continued
to cut the medicine, but this could be cured by taking the medicine properly (three 250-
mg pills). The psychiatrist also opined that Applicant’s bipolar disorder (1) was not
causing now or in the future a significant defect in judgment or reliability, and (2) was
not causing now or in the future a significant defect in psychological, social, or
occupational functioning.  The prognosis was to continue seeing his psychiatrist. 11
Applicant remains under the care of his psychiatrist, and he sees the doctor
about once every three months.  The doctor did not appear as a witness, and so the12
facts below are derived from a one-page letter, dated June 15, 2009.  The letterhead13
indicates the doctor is associated with the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology,
but otherwise specific details about the doctor’s knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
education in the field of psychiatry in general and in treating bipolar disorder are
unknown; again, a curriculum vitae or resume was not attached to the letter or
otherwise offered as evidence. The psychiatrist’s letter is addressed to whom it may
concern and consists of five sentences in two paragraphs as follows: 
I have been following [Applicant] since June 10, 2005, for a diagnosis of
Bipolar disorder. His current medication is [medicine] 750 mg daily and his
most recent [medicine] level was 57 on February 11, 2009. 
My last appointment with [Applicant] was on May 1, 2009, and he was
doing very well, with overall mood, sleep and thought processes. He has
 Exhibit AA. 14
 Tr. 85.15
 Tr. 89.16
 Tr. 130.17
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to18
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.19
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).22
5
been compliant with his treatment regimen and keeps appointments
regularly. Currently, his prognosis is good.  14
Applicant has been on the three 250-mg pills daily regimen since about October
2008.  He has taken the medication consistently without exception.  Applicant15 16
understands that the course of his treatment will be staying on bipolar medication for the
rest of his life.  17
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As18
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,19
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An20
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  21
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 26
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).27
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.28
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating29
conditions). 
6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An23
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate24
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme25
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.26
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.27
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the28
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
The gravamen of this case is whether Applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information is questioned or put into doubt due to his ongoing mental-health
condition of bipolar disorder. But before addressing that issue, it is necessary to
address the other guidelines set forth in the SOR.
Concerning foreign influence under Guideline B,  Applicant does have family29
ties, via his marriage, to Malaysia that fall within the scope of the guideline as potentially
disqualifying matters. But based on this record, coupled with Applicant’s longstanding
ties and faithful service to the U.S., his family ties to Malaysia are rather bland and
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 33, 34, and 35 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating30
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 27, 28, and 29 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating31
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 27. 32
7
benign and do not create a heightened risk of exploitation due to foreign influence.
Accordingly, Guideline B is decided for Applicant.
Concerning handling protected information under Guideline K,  Applicant’s30
security incident in October 2006, which was based on two separate incidents, falls
within the scope of the guideline as potentially disqualifying matters. The record shows
this was a serious matter as reflected by the employer-imposed punishment. The record
also shows Applicant is no longer serving as the ISSO, he has a favorable (if not hyper-
sensitive) attitude toward security responsibilities, and there are no other similar
incidents in his background. Taken together, these two security violations in the same
month during a 25-year career in the defense industry are not so singularly egregious
that Applicant should be disqualified on this basis. Accordingly, Guideline K is decided
for Applicant.
Under Guideline I,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into31
doubt due to an applicant’s psychological conditions. The overall concern under the
guideline is that:
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist)
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government,
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference
concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of seeking mental health counseling.32
The guideline provides for three conditions that could raise security concerns and
may be disqualifying. The three conditions are as follows:
Behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent,
paranoid, or bizarre behavior;
An opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the individual
has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may impair
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 28 (a) – (c).33
 Exhibit 4. 34
 Exhibit 4. 35
8
The individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a diagnosed
emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take prescribed
medication.33
In SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, the Agency alleged and Applicant admitted behavior that
appears somewhat odd or strange. Because Applicant admitted the behavior, it was not
addressed in detail in the findings of fact. It was not alleged in the SOR, but it was
certainly implied or suggested by the Agency’s case at hearing that the behavior was a
manifestation of or related to Applicant’s bipolar disorder. The record does not persuade
me that is the case despite that the behavior in question was odd or strange. The
Agency’s psychiatrist did not address this behavior in the evaluation.  And no other34
evidence (for example, expert witness testimony) was produced to show that the
behavior in question was a manifestation of or related to Applicant’s bipolar disorder,
and I cannot assume it to be the case. Accordingly, on this basis, the first DC
concerning paranoid or bizarre behavior does not apply against Applicant. 
But both the second and third DC apply against Applicant. They apply because,
as I read the evaluation in its entirety, the Agency’s psychiatrist found Applicant was
unstable in August 2008 due to cutting his prescribed medication.  Given these35
circumstances, security concerns about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness are justified. 
The guideline also provides the certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
security concerns. The five mitigating conditions under the guideline are:
The identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the
treatment plan;
The individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program
for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is currently
receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly
qualified mental health professional;
Recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 29 (a) – (e). 36
 Exhibit AA. 37
 Tr. 16. 38
 See Fed. R. Evid. 703 (Bases of Opinion Testimony by Experts). 39
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2 (a)(1) – (9).40
9
The past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one caused
by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been resolved, and
the individual no longer shows indications of emotional instability; and
There is no indication of a current problem.36
The record supports application of the first, second, and third mitigating
conditions in Applicant’s favor. Based on this record, however, I am not persuaded that
Applicant’s condition of bipolar disorder is wholly mitigated and no longer an ongoing
security concern. What is missing here is persuasive and convincing evidence that
Applicant’s condition is under control and will remain so for the foreseeable future. 
In his opening statement, Applicant’s Counsel described Applicant’s
psychiatrist’s letter  as “the most cogent exhibit” for the Guideline I issues.  That would37 38
be the case had the letter contained enough detail and context to be helpful. As written,
it is of little value and receives limited weight. Besides its lack of comprehensiveness,
the key defect is that—although the  psychiatrist opined that Applicant’s prognosis was
good—I have no idea why the psychiatrist came to that opinion because the letter does
not provide the bases of the opinion.  The facts or data that the psychiatrist relied upon39
may have provided the context for the prognosis. Also, it may have demonstrated that
the prognosis was thoughtful, reasonable, and valid, which is the type of prognosis a
clearance decision may be based upon. This type of evidence is typically provided
through expert witness testimony or a comprehensive report or both. The five-sentence
letter raises as many questions as it appears to answer. And given the clearly-
consistent standard, coupled with Applicant’s chronic condition, the five-sentence letter
is not sufficient evidence to satisfy Applicant’s burden. Accordingly, Guideline I is
decided against Applicant. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to
Applicant’s favorable evidence, to include the character witness and Exhibits A–AA, and
I also considered the nine-factor whole-person concept.  Although much of this40
information is helpful to Applicant, it is insufficient to meet his burden.
 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline I. Applicant did not meet his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided
against Applicant. 
10
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline I: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline K: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.      
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
