 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 08-06774   
         ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has acted responsibly to meet his financial obligations and has 
mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial Considerations. 
Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on November 16, 2005. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
 
2 
affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 19, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG). In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on April 10, 2009, Applicant 
admitted all allegations under Guideline F, except for allegations 1.c., 1.d., 1.g., and 1.j. 
Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 17, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on June 22, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 2, 
2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 23, 2009. During the hearing, 
the government offered four exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant had attached nine documents to his 
answer to the SOR; for administrative convenience, I marked them as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through I. At the hearing, Applicant offered his own testimony and that 
of one witness. He also offered six exhibits, which were marked as AE J through O, and 
admitted without objection. I held the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. Department Counsel forwarded without objection Applicant’s timely 
submission of three additional documents. I admitted the additional documents as AE P 
through R. DOHA received the transcript on July 30, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted as fact. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of Reasons, and the record evidence, 
I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 47 years old, has been married for 13 years. He has two daughters, 
aged 21 and 23. His 12-year-old son resides with Applicant and his wife. He is a field 
engineer and has been employed by the same defense contractor since 2000. He has 
been taking college courses since March 2008, and will complete credits for his 
associate’s degree in February 2010. His company pays for his tuition and expenses. 
He hopes to move ahead in his company once he completes his degree. He has not 
been unemployed in the past ten years. This is his first application for a security 
clearance (GE 1; Tr. 30-32, 39, 67). 
 
Applicant was born in a southern city (A) and worked there for most of his life. He 
began working for defense contractor B in that city in 2000. In November 2005, his 
 
 
3 
employer informed him of pending job cuts. Although the company could no longer 
employ him in city A, his supervisor appreciated his skills, and offered him a position in 
another city (B). Despite having just purchased a house in city A, Applicant and his wife 
decided he needed to stay employed, and they moved the family to city B in early 2006. 
Applicant's spouse was unemployed for several weeks after their move. City B had a 
higher cost of living, and Applicant had to pay for housing there as well as the mortgage 
payment on the house he had purchased in city A. Most of Applicant's bills started to 
become delinquent after the move, and he struggled financially for about one year. He 
did not avoid his creditors, but talked with them and explained that he was unable to 
afford the settlements or large payments they required (GE 1, 3, 4; Tr. 32-36, 93). 
 
Applicant considered renting his house in city A, but the standard rental rate 
would not have covered Applicant's expenses, such as the cost of the property 
manager. When he was having trouble paying his mortgage on the house in city A, 
Applicant stayed in touch with the mortgage lender. The company worked with Applicant 
and he was allowed to make half-payments. The company eventually allowed Applicant 
to do a short sale, and Applicant was able to sell the house in 2007 (GE 2 [letter dated 
May 22, 2007]; Tr. 37-39). 
 
Applicant sought out consumer credit counseling, but was told that his debts 
were too substantial. He also investigated filing for bankruptcy, and spoke with an 
attorney. He decided against it because he felt that the negative effect of bankruptcy on 
his financial record would be significant. He talked with two banks about obtaining a 
consolidation loan, but he did not qualify at that time (Tr. 35-37). 
 
The debts alleged in the SOR total approximately $77,000. Applicant and his wife 
earn a net monthly income of approximately $4,487, which equals a net annual income 
of approximately $54,000. After paying expenses of $2,640 and debt payments of 
$1,487 (including the payment on his wife’s 2009 car), Applicant has about $360 net 
monthly remainder. He did not separately list his payments for child support arrears 
under monthly debts because the $200 per month is automatically deducted from his 
paycheck (GE 2; Tr. 40-43). 
 
Applicant's wife has worked as a security guard for a defense contractor since 
2006. When she applied for a security clearance, questions were raised as to their 
debts, but she was approved and has held a security clearance for approximately one 
year. She testified that their financial problems began when they moved to city B, while 
still paying a mortgage in city A. She noted that they have worked to bring their debts 
back to a current status, and their credit score is improving. She purchased a 2009 car 
in her own name and has made all payments timely. (Tr. 93-99) 
 
 The Statement of Reasons alleges 11 debts. The current status of the alleged 
debts follows. 
 
 
 
4 
                                                
$ Credit card - $1,289 (allegation 1.a.): Payment plan. Applicant had difficulty 
determining what company held this account. When he reached the correct 
agency, he established a plan of $50 per month and had made two payments as 
of the date of the hearing (GE 3, 4; AE K; Tr. 55-57).  
 
$ Credit cards - $671 (allegation 1.b.) and $271 (allegation 1.c.): Payment plan. 
Applicant believes allegation 1.c. may be a duplicate of 1.b. In 2003 or 2004, he 
was able to consolidate several credit card balances, including 1.b., with the 
creditor listed in 1.e. That creditor sold the account to the creditor shown in AE 
J. However, the credit bureau reports mistakenly list the original credit card 
balances as still delinquent. The outstanding balance on the account is $13,567. 
He was paying $125 per month when he was in city A. He is now paying $60 per 
month and hoping to obtain a settlement in the future (GE 4; AE F, J; Tr. 58-62, 
64-68). 
 
$ Finance - $1,337 (allegation 1.d) and $8,452 (allegation 1.e.): Payment plan 
(allegation 1.e.). He was offered a settlement amount of $5,000 but was unable 
to make a lump-sum payment. He established a payment plan and provided 
evidence that he is making payments according to the plan at a rate of $150 per 
month, automatically deducted from his checking account. Applicant does not 
recognize the debt in 1.d. (GE 3, 4; AE C, M; Tr. 52-55, 69-71). 
 
$ Child support - $38,824 (allegation 1.f.): Automatic deduction. Applicant 
originally paid both child support and arrears. AE D and N show the amounts 
deducted for child support and arrears between 2003 and 2007. As of April 
2007, Applicant owes only arrears. His monthly payments of $200 are deducted 
directly from his paycheck. Between 1997 and 2009, he paid a total of $30,220 
(GE 3, 4; AE D, N; Tr. 44, 48-52). 
 
$ Automobile loan - $23,475 (allegation 1.g.): Paid. Applicant obtained a 
settlement offer from the creditor for $4,695. Applicant paid the amount in full in 
March 2009 (GE 3, 4; AE E, L; Tr. 26, 52).  
$ Secured loan - $210 (allegation 1.h.): Unpaid. This debt is a loan Applicant 
obtained when he operated a small computer business in city A. He is willing to 
pay the debt, but has been unable to locate the creditor (GE 3, 4; Tr. 62-63).  
 
$ Credit cards - $778 (allegation 1.i.) and $584 (allegation 1.j.): Paid; Payment 
plan. Applicant provided documentation that he paid the debt alleged at 1.i. in 
October 2008. Allegation 1.j. is included in the consolidation plan discussed 
under allegation 1.b., above  (GE 3; AE A)1  
 
1 The debts in allegations 1.i. and 1.j. are owed to the same creditor. Applicant testified that 1.i. was 
included in the consolidation plan and 1.j. is paid. However, AE A shows that 1.i. is paid. I find Applicant 
confused the debts to the same creditor, and it is allegation 1.j. that is included in the consolidation plan. 
 
 
5 
                                                
 
$ Credit card - $1,210 (allegation 1.k.): Unpaid. Applicant was paying on it timely 
when he lived in city A. He had trouble maintaining the payments after he 
moved to city B. Once he was financially able to resume payments, he could not 
locate the current holder of the account (GE 3; Tr. 74-77). 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Decisions must reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
the Financial Considerations Guideline.   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.5 
 
2 Directive. 6.3. 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 See Egan at 531; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                           
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
Disqualifying condition AG ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 
AG ¶19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. Applicant has 
numerous debts, most of which became delinquent between 2006 and 2007. He was 
unable to pay them because of limited resources after a move to a city with a high cost 
of living. The record contains no evidence of other disqualifying conditions such as 
debts related to alcoholism, gambling or deceptive practices.  
 
 The Financial Considerations Guideline (AG ¶ 20) also contains factors that can 
mitigate security concerns. The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
After Applicant's employer in his home state decided to downsize, Applicant 
accepted the offer of a position in another city. Between 2006 and 2008, he was paying 
 
 
 
 
7 
the mortgage on his home in city A, while paying rent and living expenses in city B. The 
company’s downsizing was an unexpected event that Applicant could not control. He 
unfortunately purchased a home about the same time, not knowing that he would be 
losing his position. He could not anticipate that he would need to move to an expensive 
area in order to retain his job. He acted reasonably by consulting with a consumer 
counseling agency, discussing his options with an attorney--including bankruptcy--
keeping in touch with his creditors, and seeking to establish payment plans. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. 
 
Once Applicant became financially able to work on his debts, he made 
persistent efforts to bring his financial situation under control. Applicant paid several 
debts and established payment plans for others. The relatively small amount 
outstanding on two unpaid debts is not enough to raise a security concern. Applicant’s 
financial situation is under control and his conduct shows a good-faith effort to resolve 
his delinquencies. AG ¶ 20(c) and (d) apply. I find for Applicant on Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
spplicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the spplicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the Guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited 
Guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant accrued a substantial amount of delinquent debt over the past several 
years. His financial problems resulted from a combination of factors including his 
company’s downsizing, a home purchase that occurred at the time of the downsizing, 
and a move to a more expensive area in order to keep his job. His inability to pay his 
debts resulted from factors that he could not control or anticipate. However, Applicant 
kept in touch with the creditors, established payment plans when he could, and paid off 
several debts. His efforts show that his debts resulted not from any desire to avoid his 
 
 
8 
obligations, but from lack of funds. Applicant acted in a mature and responsible 
fashion. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that an applicant is not required to have 
paid every debt in the SOR, but must show that he has established a plan and has 
taken actions to implement the plan.6 Applicant’s efforts demonstrate a sincere intent 
to meet his financial obligations. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available 
information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has 
satisfied the doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s 
interests. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.k.   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                 
6 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
