                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-03440 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III 
position is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2007, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 
85P).1 On March 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny Applicant eligibility for a public trust position, citing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
 
1  FORM Item 4. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 19, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated April 3, 2009, was provided to her by 
letter dated April 8, 2009. Applicant signed the receipt for the DOHA transmittal letter on 
April 14, 2009. She was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She failed to submit any materials, 
comments, or objections in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
June 25, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.s 
and 1.aa, which she denied. She also denied SOR ¶¶ 2.a and b. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old defense contractor employee. She attended college 
from January through April 2002; however, it is not clear from the record the number of 
credits she completed, or whether she received a degree. She separated from her 
spouse in May 2004, and they were divorced in August 2004. She has three sons. Her 
oldest son is in college. It is not clear from the record whether they are all from this 
marriage, what their ages are, how long they have been in Applicant’s custody, or 
whether they received financial assistance from their father.  
 
Applicant worked for six different employers from July 1999 through August 2007 
(Item 4). She was laid off in between jobs for approximately 30 days during 2006 and in 
2007. Applicant has been unemployed since August 2007. She left her last job under 
unfavorable circumstances, because she used her company credit card for gas without 
authorization (Item 4, p. 3).  
 
In her public trust position application, Applicant answered “Yes,” to question 19 
(asking whether in the last seven years she had filed for bankruptcy, had been subject 
to a tax lien, or had a judgment rendered against her). She answered “No,” to question 
20, asking whether she was currently over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial 
obligation. She failed to disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d through 1.o, 
and 1.q. Her security clearance background investigation addressed her financial 
problems, and included the review of her two answers to DOHA interrogatories (Items 5 
and 6), excerpts of documents related to her 2004 bankruptcy petition (Item 8), and 
2007, 2008, and 2009 credit bureau reports (CBR) (Items 11, 10, and 9, respectively).  
 
 
3 
 
 
In her 2007 interview with a government investigator, consistent with her answers 
to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the debts alleged in the SOR and provided 
explanations about her financial problems. She explained that her financial problems 
were created by her 2004 divorce. She was awarded minimal financial assistance 
through the court, receiving no alimony or maintenance and only $50 for child support.  
 
Following her divorce, Applicant was overwhelmed by her debts. She was not 
earning enough money to pay both her day-to-day living expenses and her prior legal 
obligations. At the time, she had no budget or payment plan to pay her debts. In June 
2004, she filed for bankruptcy protection; however, she retracted her petition in August 
2004. Applicant explained that she was concerned about the adverse effects her filing 
for bankruptcy would have on her future plans of opening her own business. She also 
felt responsible to her creditors and wanted to make good on her obligations.  
 
In her 2007 statement, Applicant also claimed she was receiving financial 
assistance from a mortgage company employee who was helping her to review her 
financial options. This included a debt consolidation plan, negotiations with the creditors 
to settle some of the debts, and obtaining a second job to generate sufficient income to 
pay for the possible debt consolidation plan.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 24 debts totaling approximately $29,700, all of which are 
established by the record evidence. Her debts include four unpaid judgments (two 
dating back to 2004, one from 2005, and one from 2007); an unpaid 2006 returned 
check, the unauthorized use of her company credit card in 2007, numerous delinquent 
medical debts, unpaid utility bills, and two repossessed cars. In 2007, Applicant sought 
the assistance of an attorney to help her file for bankruptcy protection. She intends to 
resolve her financial problems by filing for bankruptcy protection sometime in the near 
future. She provided no documentary evidence to show she has filed for bankruptcy.  
 
Applicant presented no other documentary or corroborating evidence of any 
efforts taken to contact any of her creditors, to pay any of her debts, or to otherwise 
resolve any of her financial obligations. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant falsified question 20 of her 2007 SF 85P 
(asking whether she was currently over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial 
obligation), when she answer “No,” and failed to disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.d through 1.o, and 1.q. Applicant explained she mistakenly believed that the 
question was addressing only student loans. In her response to the SOR, she indicated 
that “the choice was not intentional,” and that she has always admitted and discussed 
her debts. She also averred she was honest in discussing her financial problems during 
her background interview.  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her delinquent debts. In reaching this 
conclusion, I considered Applicant’s failed 2004 bankruptcy filing, her failure to present 
any evidence of efforts to pay or resolve any of her debts since then, the number of her 
 
4 
 
 
delinquent debts, the small value of many of the individual debts, the aggregate value of 
the debt, and the period over which the debts have been delinquent.  
 
Applicant is a single mother of three, living from paycheck to paycheck, while 
trying to gain financial stability and keep her life on track. Notwithstanding her financial 
problems, she has managed to help her older son through college and needs to 
maintain her financial stability to help her children (Item 6). Her 2007 personal financial 
statement shows that she has a negative remainder after paying all her bills each month 
without considering the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR (Item 6). 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s controlling adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and common sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
 
5 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance 
[or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that an applicant’s failure or 
inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleges 24 delinquent/charged off accounts, including four judgments, a 
returned check, and numerous medical and utility bills totaling approximately $29,700. 
All of the delinquent debts are established by the record evidence. Except for her failed 
2004 bankruptcy filing, Applicant presented no evidence of efforts to pay or resolve the 
alleged financial obligations, many of which have been delinquent for many years. AG ¶ 
 
6 
 
 
19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting 
financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to raise the full applicability of any 
mitigating condition. Her financial problems are ongoing and her evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely that they will recur. Her 
financial problems and her failure to fully address the trustworthiness concerns cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented evidence that could establish circumstances beyond her 
control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, i.e., her divorce, being a single 
mother of three, and her periods of unemployment. AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but only 
partially. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show how her 2004 divorce continues 
to impact her current financial situation and whether she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has been employed from 1999 to 2007, albeit with small 
periods of unemployment between jobs and unemployed since 2007. Notwithstanding, 
she presented little evidence of efforts to contact creditors to pay, settle, or to resolve 
her debts beyond her failed 2004 bankruptcy filing and her intention to file for 
bankruptcy protection in the future. 
 
7 
 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because, there are no clear indications that her 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. Her inability to pay even 
small debts shows she was financially overextended, and that her financial problems 
are likely to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by the 
facts in this case. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security/trustworthiness concern 
stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on her public trust position 
application when she failed to disclose that she was over 180 days delinquent on most 
of the financial obligations alleged in the SOR. In reaching this conclusion, I considered 
Applicant’s failed 2004 bankruptcy filing, the lack of evidence of efforts to pay or resolve 
any of her debts since she acquired them, the number of her delinquent debts, the small 
value of many of the individual debts, the aggregate value of the debt, and the period 
over which the debts have been delinquent. Additionally, Applicant bounced a check, 
and used a company credit card for gas without authorization. 
 
Applicant’s actions create trustworthiness concerns under two disqualifying 
conditions. Her behavior triggers the applicability of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 16(a) 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” and 16(e) “personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing.”  
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none are fully established 
by the sparse record evidence. Applicant falsified her SF 85P. It was not until after she 
was confronted during the interview process that she admitted her delinquent debts. Her 
falsification is a serious offense (felony), it is recent, and casts doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. Moreover, Applicant’s financial problems led her to 
engage in questionable behavior. Her questionable behavior increased her vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance, 
or public trust position, must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, trained 
woman, and a good mother. She has been successful working for numerous employers 
since 1999. There is no evidence of any security violation, or that she is not a 
competent worker. These factors show some responsibility and mitigation. 
 
On the other hand, there are more substantial circumstances that weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis. She presented little evidence of efforts to 
resolve her debts. There are no clear indications that her financial problem is being 
resolved or is under control. Her inability to pay even relatively small debts shows she is 
financially overextended. Based on the available evidence, she does not have the 
financial means to resolve her financial problems.  
 
Moreover, she deliberately falsified her public trust position application when she 
failed to disclose her full financial situation. Considering her 2004 bankruptcy filing, the 
number and aggregate value of debts and judgments, and the period over which the 
debts have been delinquent, Applicant knew or should have known of her delinquent 
debts and judgments at the time she completed her application. Applicant’s financial 
problems have led her to engage in illegal activities such as passing a bad check, 
abusing her employer’s credit card privileges, and falsifying her SF 85P. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant’s financial behavior and personal 
conduct raise doubt about her ability to have access to sensitive information and her 
trustworthiness. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from her financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.aa:    Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy an ADP I/II/III position. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
