 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07101 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on November 27, 2006. On April 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 9, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on June 17, 2009. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on June 18, 2009.  
Applicant received the FORM on June 24, 2009. He had 30 days to submit a response 
to the FORM. He did not submit a response. On August 14, 2009, the FORM was 
forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned to me on August 19, 2009. Based 
 
2 
 
 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.c, 1.f, and 2.a – 2.c. He denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old mechanical engineer with a Department of Defense 
contractor. He seeks to maintain his security clearance.  He has held a security 
clearance since August 2001. He received his undergraduate degree in August 2000. 
He received a master’s degree in June 2003. He is single and has no children. (Item 4)   
 
On April 1, 2002, Applicant provided a signed, sworn statement to an investigator 
conducting his background investigation.  In the statement, he summarized his past 
illegal marijuana use. He listed marijuana use once in May 1995, two times in June 
1999, once in June 2000, once in August 2001, and March 2002. He smoked marijuana 
in social settings with either friends from college or his roommates. (Item 7 at 5-6) At the 
end of his statement, Applicant made the following statement with regard to future 
marijuana use: 
 
….I will never use marijuana again. I don’t like it and it makes no sense. I 
wanted to try marijuana before because of curiousity. But, I know I don’t 
like it, I won’t try marijuana or any other drug again. (Item 7 at 6)  
 
After this investigation, Applicant was granted a security clearance. (I conclude 
this based on the fact that Applicant indicated he has held a security clearance since 
August 2001 in response to section 26(a) on his e-QIP application, dated November 27, 
2006. He also admits that he was granted a security clearance in November 2001 in his 
response to the SOR.)   
 
In September 2006, Applicant signed a statement as part of his employment 
agreement that he would not use illegal drugs. In October 2006, he smoked marijuana 
with a friend.  Applicant felt uncomfortable about violating the no illegal drug use policy. 
He self-reported his illegal marijuana usage to his company’s security office. (Item 6 at 
3) 
 
There is some confusion in the record as to when Applicant self-reported his 
illegal marijuana use to his security office. His e-QIP application signed by Applicant on 
November 27, 2006, refers to self-reporting his marijuana use in October 2006. (Item 4, 
section 24) In his response to the SOR, Applicant provided a copy of a memorandum 
summarizing Applicant’s self-reporting of illegal marijuana use. The memorandum is 
dated October 25, 2007. The memorandum refers to the subject of “Illegal Substance 
Sept 07.” The body of the memorandum is a statement by Applicant where he admits to 
using marijuana in September 2006. (Item 3 at 6) I conclude the memorandum is 
incorrectly dated. It should have been dated October 25, 2006, considering Applicant 
 
3 
 
 
attached this memorandum to the e-QIP application that he completed in November 
2006. Based on the record evidence Applicant used marijuana on one occasion 
between September 2006 and October 2006. 
 
On June 11, 2007, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator in conjunction 
with another security clearance background investigation.  The investigator prepared an 
unsworn summary of Applicant’s interview.  Applicant admitted to using marijuana from 
May 1995 to October 2006. He used marijuana for the first time at age 16 in May 1995. 
He did not use marijuana again until the fall of 1999. From 1999 until he graduated in 
June 2000, Appellant used marijuana on approximately 10 to 15 occasions while a 
college student.  After graduating from college, the unsworn summary claims Applicant 
said he did not use marijuana because it was not accessible to him. Applicant told the 
investigator that his future intent with regard to marijuana use was to not use marijuana 
or any illegal drugs because he does not want to jeopardize his career. (Item 6 at 3) 
 
In response to interrogatories, notarized by Applicant on September 10, 2008, 
Applicant states that his last use of illegal drugs was in September 2007. (Item 5, 
section 1.d) He also admits to using marijuana in September 2007 in his response to 
the SOR. (Item 3, SOR ¶ 2.a) 
 
No evidence was submitted pertaining to Applicant’s duty performance or other 
whole person factors. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG &24:       
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DI DC) & 25(a) (any drug 
abuse) applies to Applicant’s case. He illegally used marijuana from May 1995 to at 
least September 2007.  While the record evidence does not indicate Applicant was a 
habitual user, his marijuana use cannot be considered a one-time experimental event. 
He used marijuana on several occasions while in high school and college. He used 
marijuana on at least three occasions after graduating from college (i.e. March 2002, 
September/October 2006, and September 2007) 
 
Applicant admits that he used marijuana after being granted a security clearance 
in November 2001.  DI DC ¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance) applies.   
 
 
5 
 
 
On two occasions, Applicant stated that he did not intend to use illegal marijuana 
in the future, only to revert to marijuana use.  On April 1, 2002, he stated that he no 
longer intended to use marijuana, only to use marijuana again on one occasion in 
September/October 2006. On June 11, 2007, he told an investigator conducting his 
background investigation that he did not intend to use marijuana in the future. Three 
months later in September 2007, he used marijuana. His failure to follow through with 
his intentions to refrain from illegal drug use raises DI DC ¶ 25(h) (expressed intent to 
continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue 
drug use).          
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Drug Involvement Mitigating Condition (DI MC) 
¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. Applicant used 
marijuana on numerous occasions after being granted a security clearance. He 
expressed an intent to refrain from further marijuana use on two occasions, only to 
decide to use marijuana despite his expressed intentions. While Applicant self-disclosed 
his September 2006 marijuana use to his security office, he used marijuana again in 
September 2007 as evidenced by his answer to interrogatories on September 10, 2008, 
and his admission to SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant’s continued use of marijuana after 
expressing an intent to refrain from further use raises questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and reliability.  
 
 The second mitigating condition that potentially applies is FC MC & 26(b) (a 
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation 
from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment 
where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.) Although 
Applicant states he does not intend to use marijuana ever again, he has made this 
assertion several times over the past seven years. However, he seems to use 
marijuana if he socializes with a friend who happens to have marijuana. I cannot 
conclude Applicant no longer associates with friends who use marijuana. Although he 
has not used marijuana for close to two years, I cannot conclude that an appropriate 
period of abstinence has occurred because of Applicant’s history of continued marijuana 
use contrary to his expressed intentions not to use marijuana in the future. 
 
  Applicant has not met his burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There are specific disqualifying conditions which may be raised. Applicant’s 
statement to an authorized investigator for the Department of Defense on June 11, 
2007, that he did not use marijuana after college graduation in June 2000 to October 
2006 when he, in fact, used marijuana in August 2001 and March 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.f) 
raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing 
false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical authority or other official government 
representative). However, Applicant previously disclosed his August 2001 and March 
2002 marijuana use in a signed, sworn statement, dated April 1, 2002. Considering that 
he previously disclosed his post-college drug use to the government prior to his June 
11, 2007, interview, I conclude that his falsification was not material.  Personal Conduct 
Mitigating Condition (PC MC) ¶ 17 (c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies with respect to the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.f.  
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and 
may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group) applies. Applicant’s concealment of his marijuana use, in 
particular, while holding a security clearance made him vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress.    
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(f) (violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment) applies. Applicant was aware 
of his employer’s policy of no illegal drug use. In September 2006, he signed a 
statement notifying his employer that he would not use illegal drugs. He used marijuana 
approximately one month later.  He also admits to using marijuana in September 2007. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The personal conduct concern may be mitigated. The following Personal 
Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) does not apply. While Applicant should be commended for self-
disclosing his illegal marijuana use in October 2006, it was not the first time that he 
used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. In fact he admits to using 
marijuana in September 2007, close to one year after his self disclosure. He continued 
to use marijuana after making statements in 2002 and 2007 that he no longer intended 
to use illegal drugs. Given his past conduct of reverting back to marijuana use despite 
expressing intentions to the contrary, his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment 
remain in question. 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) does not apply. Applicant 
self disclosed his October 2006 illegal drug use to his security office. However, he used 
marijuana approximately one year later in September 2007.  His continued use of 
marijuana while holding a security clearance demonstrates unreliable and untrustworthy 
behavior.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) applies. While Applicant’s 
marijuana use while holding a security clearance made him vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, he is no longer vulnerable because he fully disclosed his past 
marijuana use during his security investigation. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has history of recreational 
marijuana use over a period of eight years. He used marijuana on several occasions 
after having been granted a security clearance and after expressing his intentions to 
refrain from further illegal drug use. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
raised under drug involvement and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
