1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-06334
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 21, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On March 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR), in writing on March 20, 2009, and
initially requested that a decision be made without a hearing before an Administrative
Judge. Thereafter a request was made to have a hearing before an Administrative
Judge. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on April 13, 2009. DOHA
initially issued a notice of hearing on April 23 2009, and the hearing was scheduled to
be heard on June 24, 2009, in Honolulu, Hawaii. Because of scheduling issues, the
hearing was rescheduled, and a second notice of hearing was issued on May 14, 2009.
The hearing convened on July 21, 2009, in Honolulu, Hawaii. 
2
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 12, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and she submitted Exhibits A through
C, which were entered into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr) was received
on August 7, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 38 years old. She is married, and she has three children. She is
employed by a defense contractor, but she is currently on leave from this employer. She
seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense
sector.
Paragraph 1 Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations of overdue debts, 1.a. through 1.j., and three
allegations regarding criminal conduct, 1.k. through 1.m., under Adjudicative Guideline
F. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as they were listed in the
SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $942. At the hearing,
Applicant testified that she believed that she had paid this bill. She last talked to a
representative of this creditor in 2005, but she has taken no action since that time. At
this time, she does not know the status of this debt, but she indicted that she intends to
pay it (Tr at 27-31). I find that this debt has not been resolved. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $128. Applicant
testified that she has not paid this debt. While she claimed she did not think that she
incurred this debt, there was no evidence of Applicant filing any dispute (Tr at 31-32). I
find that this debt has not been resolved. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $208 to the same
creditor as 1.b., above. Applicant testified that she has not paid this debt. I find that this
debt has not been resolved. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,336. Applicant
testified that this debt for her husbands credit card has not been paid (Tr at 33). I find
that this debt has not been resolved. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $114.  Applicant
testified that she has paid this debt (Tr at 33). Exhibit A shows that this debt has been
paid.
3
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $174. Applicant
testified that this debt has not been paid (Tr at 35-36). I find that this debt has not been
resolved. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $7,643. Applicant
testified that she plans to dispute this debt for housing. However, her dispute is with the
Army for not paying this debt. She did concede that this creditor is entitled to be paid (Tr
at 36-39).  I find that this debt has not been resolved. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $56. Applicant
testified that she has paid this debt (Tr at 39-40). Exhibit B shows that this debt has
been paid.
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $357. Applicant
testified that she has paid this debt (Tr at 41-42). Applicant was unable to locate a
receipt that established that she has paid this debt. Exhibit C shows that she made one
payment of $106.84, but it does not establish that it was for this debt, nor does it
establish that this debt has been resolved.
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $390. Applicant
testified that she believes this debt was paid through an offset, but she is not sure and
she has not introduced evidence to substantiate that this debt was paid. (Tr at 52-43). I
cannot find that this debt has been paid. 
1.k. The SOR alleges that in or about 1995, during a United States Marine Corps
(USMC) criminal investigation, Applicant admitted to using an ATM card belonging to
another person, without authorization. Exhibit 8 consists of the records from the USMC
criminal investigation. Applicant was accused of theft from the bank account of another
individual. The records seem to indicate that Applicant withdrew $350 in total, on three
separate occasions, with the ATM card of a friend of hers that was given to her by
someone else, and without the owner’s authorization However, no conclusion is
reached in Exhibit 8, and Applicant’s testimony is limited, so I do not find that this
allegation gives any specific insight in this case. 
1.l. The SOR alleges that in or about 1997, Applicant was charged in State A,
with (1) Forgery of a Personal Check, (2) Larceny of Government Funds, and (3)
Larceny of Private Property. Applicant received a Letter of Debarment from all Army
installations in State A, effective April 3, 1997. Applicant’s explanation of this event is
that she was simply with someone else and was unaware of the checks until confronted
by the Military Police. Exhibit 9, the records from an investigation into this matter by the
Department of the Army, terminated the investigation without coming to a conclusion.
Exhibit 12 is a Letter of Debarment issued to Applicant on April 3, 1997. It states [the
victim] “declined to prosecute the subject due to insufficient evidence to support a
conviction.”  I  do not find that this allegation gives any insight in this case. 
1.m. The SOR alleges that in or about 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged
with (1) Financial Card Theft, a felony, and  (2) Financial Card Fraud. Applicant plead
4
guilty to Count (2) and was sentenced to 30 days confinement, 12 months probation,
and ordered to pay costs in the amount of $86 and restitution in the amount of $241.75.
Count (1) was dismissed. Applicant denied that she ever served any time in
confinement as a result of this incident (Tr at 70). No other evidence was submitted
regarding this allegation. 
Applicant testified that because of the pending security clearance hearing, she
has been suspended without pay from her current employment since March 9, 2009,
and she has not sought any other employment since that time (Tr at 71). She attributed
her financial difficulties to “irresponsibility on my part” (Tr at 97). Applicant averred that
she has stopped writing checks, with the exception of those to her daughter’s school,
because of the number of checks with insufficient funds that she has written, and which
are part of the reason for her overdue debts. 
In her responses to interrogatories, signed by Applicant on August 25, 2008, she
promised to pay off most of her debts ”within the next 3-6 months.” However, by the
time of the hearing, only two debts had been proven to be resolved, and those were in
the amounts of $114 and $56.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
5
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government has established that Applicant has had a history of financial
difficulties and overdue debts.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
AG ¶ 19 (a), an Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and has been
unable to pay most of her obligations for a considerable period of time. The evidence is
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
Under AG ¶ 20 there are certain conditions that can be considered mitigating.
However, since Applicant has had a history of financial difficulties and there was no
evidence introduced to establish that Applicant has resolved most of these overdue
debts, I do not find that any mitigating condition is applicable to minimize the
Government’s concern with Applicant’s financial situation.  I resolve Guideline F against
Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
6
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guideline F, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on
all of the reasons cited above regarding Applicant’s history of overdue debts, and her
failure to resolve the majority of her debts, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a -.d, f, g, i,  j: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e,  h, k, l, m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
