                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03798
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 22, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions, (SF-86) on
December 4, 2006.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On March 24, 2009, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on April 25, 2009, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on May 27, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on June 5, 2009,
scheduling the hearing for June 30, 2009.  At the hearing the Government presented
2
four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, that were admitted
without objection.  The Applicant presented one exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s
Exhibit A, that was admitted without objection. He also testified on his own behalf.  The
record remained open to allow the Applicant to submit additional documentary
information.  The Applicant submitted four Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Post-
Hearing Exhibits A through D.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on July 10,
2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Iran.  The Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 22).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 57 years of age and has a Master’s Degree
in Electrical Engineering.  He is employed as a Aerospace Systems Engineer for a
defense contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment
in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Iran in 1952.  With his father’s urging, the Applicant
served in the Iranian Navy, attending the Iranian Military Academy for about three
months before deciding that the military was not for him.  The Iranian Government
allowed the Applicant to take an examination to enter the Navy and/ or study abroad.
He elected to attend college in the United States.  In 1972, he immigrated to the United
States at the age of nineteen, and entered on a student visa.  He stayed in the United
States because he liked the culture and the freedoms of thought, speech, and religion.
(Government Exhibit 3).  In 1982, he became a naturalized United States citizen.  He
has worked for the defense industry since the late 1970's, and has held an active
security clearance since 1997.  (See Government Exhibit 1).  He has returned to Iran on
only one occasion in the summer of 2000, to visit his ailing mother.  He is married to a
native born United States citizen, and they have two native born American children.    
The Applicant also has five siblings, three sisters and two brothers who are
citizens of Iran.  Three of them, two sisters and one brother, reside in Iran.  All of his
siblings are professionals.  His mother and father have since passed away.  His mother,
3
was a housewife her entire life, supported by her husband’s pension.  She passed away
several months ago.  The Applicant’s father was a colonel in the Army in the Shah’s
regime, and passed away in 1997.  
The Applicant’s oldest sister is 59 years old and is a pediatrician in private
practice.  Her husband is also a physician.  They are both citizens and residents of Iran
The Applicant has applied for residency for his oldest sister.  (Tr. p. 63).  His next sister
in birth order is 58 years old, a dual citizen of Iran who lives in England. She is a high
school teacher.  The Applicant’s next brother is 55 years old, and is a citizen and
resident of Iran.  He is also a physician.  The next brother in birth order is 53 years old,
and is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States and resides here.  He is an engineer.
The Applicant’s youngest sister is 50 years old, and is a citizen and resident of Iran.
She is an architect.  She spent about six months in the United States before going to
school in England.  She has since moved back to Iran.  The Applicant spoke to her last
weekend to see if she was safe.  (Tr. p. 56).  The Applicant communicates with each of
his family members in Iran from one to three times a year.  They know that he is an
engineer, but do not know that he is applying for a security clearance.  Over the years,
several of his siblings have come to the United States to visit the Applicant.   
      
The Applicant testified that he is ashamed that he did not go back for his
mother’s funeral.  He could not find his Iranian passport.  (Tr. p. 58, and Government
Exhibit 2).  He chose not to travel using his United States passport in fear that he might
be given a hard time.  (Tr. p. 58).  He feels bad and ashamed that he has not kept in
closer contact with his siblings in Iran.  (Tr. p. 60).  He loves his siblings in Iran very
much.  (Tr. p. 60 - 61).  The Applicant indicates that at the present time he has no
intentions of going back to Iran.  (Tr. p. 58).      
A letter of appreciation from a Program Director who has worked closely with the
Applicant on a particular program attests to the Applicant’s hard work, support, and
dedication to ensuring that the mission was a success.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A).  
A letter of commendation dated November 13, 2007, from a Program Director
and a Commander reflects that the Applicant has shown superb professionalism and
outstanding commitment in the performance of his job.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit C).  
Applicant received a Certificate of Appreciation dated November 13, 2007, for
outstanding support, professionalism and service to a program.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit B).
Applicant’s Performance Appraisal for the period from January 1, 2007, through
December 31, 2007, reflects an overall rating that “exceeds performance requirements”.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit D).
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Iran.  The
fact that Iran has no diplomatic relations with the United States, Iran’s efforts to acquire
nuclear weapons and other weapon of mass destruction, its support for and involvement
4
in international terrorism, it’s violent opposition to the Middle East peace process, and
it’s dismal human rights records, have been noted.  I have considered the fact that
Iranian Government officials at all levels commit serious abuses of their power and
authority.  Iran’s totalitarian government is rampant with terrorists activities, crime and
instability.  The overall deteriorating security situation in Iran, the human rights abuses,
and the government corruption elevates the cause for concern in the case.  The United
States may face no greater challenge from a single country than from Iran.    
      
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
5
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct 
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary 
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
6
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.  Then, the
Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in refutation, explanation,
mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past adverse conduct is unlikely
to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who has foreign connections may be prone to provide information
or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  The
Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance
holder to abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  None of
the mitigating conditions apply.  Applicant did not show that his emotional connection to
the United States is greater than that to Iran. 
It is acknowledged that the Applicant has lived in the United States for thirty
years.  During this period, he has held a  security clearance and worked for the defense
industry.  He has a wife and two sons who are native born United States citizens.
However, tipping the scales on the other side is the fact that the Applicant has five
siblings, who are citizens of Iran, three of whom reside in Iran, with all of whom he
maintains a close and continuing relationship.  He loves his siblings in Iran and
maintains regular ongoing contact with them by telephone between one and three times
a year.  With three siblings in Iran, he talks to at least one of them on an average of
once a month.  Although there is no evidence that any of his family members in Iran are
associated in any way with the Iranian government, there is evidence of a close bond
and strong evidence of affection with his immediate family.  This bond and affection with
his family could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Moreover, the current
political situation in Iran elevates the cause for concern in this case.  The possibility of
foreign influence exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the
compromise of classified information.  It is the Applicant’s burden to show that he is
eligible for a security clearance, not the Government’s to show that he is not.  I find that
the Applicant is vulnerable to foreign influence.  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
7
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 1.c.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.d.: Against the Applicant
 
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
