 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09983 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 9, 2008. On May 28, 
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline H. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 4, 2009; answered it on June 22, 2009; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
June 24, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 17, 2009, and the 
 
2 
 
 
case was assigned to me on July 22, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 
24, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 27, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 3, 2009. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 On my own motion, and without objection from either side, I amended the SOR to 
correctly reflect Applicant’s full name (Tr. 4-5). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old analyst employed by a federal contractor. He 
graduated from college in May 2008 with a bachelor’s degree in information systems, 
and he began working for his current employer shortly after graduation. He has never 
held a security clearance. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application, he disclosed that 
he used marijuana 80-100 times from September 2004 to February 2008, used cocaine 
once on New Year’s Day, 2008, sold marijuana to friends from August 2007 to February 
2008, and obtained and sold cocaine to two people. He explained that he stopped his 
drug involvement because he realized he needed to “grow up” and prepare for his “real 
life.” He attributed his single use of cocaine to bad judgment (GX 1 at 31-32).  
 
 During an interview with a security investigator in September 2008, Applicant 
stated that he began using marijuana in high school, and smoked it regularly two or 
three times a week. He told the investigator he used marijuana mostly because of peer 
pressure, but he also relied on it as a stress reliever, and to relieve the pain of his 
Crohn’s disease. He decided to stop using marijuana after he experienced a bad flare-
up of his Crohn’s disease in January 2008 and was hospitalized (GX 2 at 8-9). He has 
never sought or received treatment for drug abuse and does not believe he needs it (Tr. 
33). He no longer associates with any of the persons with whom he used drugs, 
purchased drugs, or provided drugs (Answer to SOR). His present circle of friends and 
his father know about his prior drug involvement (Tr. 39).  
 
 Applicant worked at various part-time and summer jobs while in college, including 
a local restaurant. Applicant purchased marijuana from one of the cooks at the 
restaurant (Tr. 35), and he sold it to friends, usually making about a $5.00 profit on each 
transaction (Tr. 36).  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. He 
submitted matters in mitigation, including a notarized statement that he “will never again 
use or distribute any illegal substance and [he] understand[s] that doing so will result in 
an automatic revocation of [his] security clearance, among other consequences.” 
 
3 
 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant submitted his college transcript, reflecting a grade point 
average of 2.970 on a four-point scale (AX A). He also submitted statements from five 
friends and former classmates (AX B-G). They describe him as honest, trustworthy, 
dependable, generous, compassionate, and loyal. They comment on his increased 
maturity, hard work, and enthusiasm for his new job. None of the friends who submitted 
letters were involved in his drug abuse (Tr. 34). His younger brother describes him as a 
reliable and trustworthy person who has matured significantly since his graduation from 
college (AX H). His performance appraisal for the period ending in June 2009 rates him 
as frequently exceeding expectations and comments favorably on his ability to take on 
independent responsibility (AX B). 
 
 Applicant has recently begun graduate school, while working full-time. He intends 
to obtain a master’s degree in information security. He is active in his church and 
participates in several musical and sports groups.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
 
4 
 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant purchased and used marijuana with varying 
frequency from September 2004 until February 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a), used cocaine once 
on New Year’s Eve (December 31, 2007-January 1, 2008) (SOR ¶ 1.b), purchased and 
sold marijuana to friends from August 2007 to February 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c), and 
purchased and sold cocaine to two people between August 2007 and February 2008 
(SOR ¶ 1.d). The concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24.  
 
Guideline H encompasses Adrugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 
24(a)(1). Drug abuse is Athe illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.@ AG ¶ 24(b). Disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline include Aany drug abuse@; and Aillegal drug possession, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.@ AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). Applicant’s drug involvement raises AG ¶ 
25(a) and (c), shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
5 
 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) 
(Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent.  There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 Applicant’s drug involvement stopped in February 2008, about 18 months before 
the hearing. He had been regularly involved in marijuana for more than three years and 
had been selling drugs for about six months. He stopped his drug involvement 
voluntarily because he wanted to change his life. He graduated from college and began 
working for his current employer in May 2008. He has a new circle of friends. He is 
deeply involved in his job, attends graduate school part-time, and is involved in his 
community. He appears to have left his college lifestyle behind him. I conclude AG ¶ 
26(a) is established.  
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b). Applicant no longer associates 
with drug users, has moved from the college environment to the adult workforce, has 
abstained from drugs for 18 months, and submitted a statement of intent that effectively 
places him on self-imposed probation. I conclude AG ¶ 16(b) is established. 
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by Asatisfactory completion of a 
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional.@ AG ¶ 26(d). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant has not sought or received any drug treatment. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is young, working on his first real job after graduation. He apparently 
evaluated his lifestyle while hospitalized in February 2008, looked toward the future, and 
decided it was time to “grow up.” He was very candid, sincere, and credible at the 
hearing. He has been open and honest about his previous drug involvement, thereby 
minimizing his vulnerability to coercion by threats of disclosure. By submitting his 
statement of intent, he has voluntarily put himself on probation, knowing that any return 
to drug involvement will terminate his budding career.  After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
based on his drug involvement. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
