                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-07325
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 22, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on a date uncertain.  On March 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline G for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 31, 2009, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The matter was assigned to another
Administrative Judge on April 16, 2009, and then transferred to a second Administrative
Judge on May 4, 2009.  The matter was transferred to the undersigned  Administrative
Judge on May 19, 2009.  Notices of hearings were issued on May 6, 2009, and July 13,
2009, and the matter was scheduled for hearing on August 18, 2009.  The Government
2
presented four Exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were
received without objection. The Applicant presented two Exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Exhibits A and B, which were received without objection.  Applicant also
testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August
25, 2009.  The record remained open until close of business on August 25, 2009, to
allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant
submitted nine Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1
through 9, which were received without objection. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 49 years old and has a Master’s Degree in Business.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as a Business Development Manager, and is
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
The Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
(See Applicant’s Response to SOR).  The Applicant is an honorably discharged veteran
of the United States Navy.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 7).  He has held a security
clearance for thirty years with no security violations.
The Applicant has been working for the current defense contractor for about
twenty years.  During this period he has never violated security policy or procedures of
the company, even though he has abused alcohol at times.  Applicant testified that he
started drinking alcohol at the age of seventeen.  He usually drank beer or wine on the
weekends.  After graduating from high school, he joined the Navy and his consumption
of alcohol increased.  In the Navy, he typically drank three nights a week when he was
not at sea, consuming three to six beers or more at each sitting.  As time passed, the
Applicant realized that his drinking had steadily increased to the point where he was
consuming alcohol every night.  He believed that he was turning into an alcoholic, so he
sought out professional help.  
From December 2002, to March 2003, the Applicant voluntarily participated in a
three month outpatient treatment program for alcohol abuse.  (Government Exhibit 4).
He found the program to be very helpful.  During the treatment, the Applicant was
diagnosed as alcohol dependent.  He learned from this program that he had evolved
over time to be an alcoholic.  The program provided him with tools and procedures to
3
help him discontinue his alcohol consumption.  Following this treatment program, the
Applicant did not consume alcohol for several years.  (Tr. p. 27).  The Applicant was
eventually confronted with stressful situations involving a transfer to a more difficult job
in the company on a troubled program.  His personal relationship was troubled, among
other things, and so he started drinking again to relieve the stress.  He phased into
drinking, and before long, found himself drinking a half of bottle of wine or more every
night.  
Again, the Applicant did not like his excessive drinking and in February 2005, the
Applicant voluntarily entered an alcohol rehabilitation treatment program.  (Government
Exhibit 4).  He was again diagnosed with alcohol dependence.  The Applicant stated
that this second treatment program has more of an emphasis on relapse and how to
prevent it from happening.  (Tr. p. 30).  Following this treatment program, the Applicant
reduced his drinking to almost nothing, but had a few glasses of wine at parties or social
events.  In March 2009, he decided to quit drinking completely.  (Tr. p. 31).
The Applicant testified that he has made some drastic changes in his life that
have helped him with his sobriety.  For one, he is no longer single.  He got married in
May 2008, to a woman who is a social drinker, but has not consumed alcohol since they
got married, due to a nerve condition.  Applicant is now very busy and has no desire to
drink.  He exercises, rebuilds cars, trucks and motorcycles, bike rides and goes fishing.
(Tr. P. 45).  Although his consumption of alcohol has never caused him any problems at
work or in the public (except for a ticket he received for an open container as a youth
many years ago), he now realizes the serious dangers involved in alcohol abuse and
wants no part of it.  If he finds a problem staying sober, he will join Alcoholics
Anonymous and become involved.  (Tr. p. 45).   
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s Manager, Security Lead, wife
and other professional colleagues and friends, who know the Applicant well, attest to his
professionalism, technical knowledge, trustworthiness, strong moral character, high
integrity, consciousness and honesty.  His meticulous attention to detail and
thoroughness in protecting classified information is specifically noted.  He is
recommended for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and
9).      
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
4
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
Condition that could raise a security concern:
22. (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
23.  (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an
alcohol abuser).
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
5
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in alcohol abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in alcohol abuse (Guideline G).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline G of the SOR.
6
Under Alcohol Abuse, Guideline G, Disqualifying Conditions 22(c), “habitual or
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent” applies.
However, given the isolated nature of the Applicant’s alcohol abuse, Mitigating
Condition 23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an
alcohol abuser) also applies. 
The Applicant’s thirty year history of alcohol abuse includes the fact that he has
been diagnosed as being alcohol dependent.  Following his last treatment program in
2005, he  significantly reduced his drinking.  He no longer drinks irresponsibly and has
not done so for at least four years.  In March 2009, he decided to discontinue his use of
alcohol altogether.  He states that he will never drink again.  This case is unique in that
the Applicant has never had any problems related to his consumption of alcohol, either
at work or in public.  When his drinking became abusive to him, he voluntarily entered
into treatment to address it.  This self awareness is unusual, and the Applicant is
commended for it.  The Applicant has decided that alcohol no longer has a place in his
life and he has been completely sober for five months.  He plans to continue his
sobriety.  I have found the Applicant to be forthright, candid and sincere throughout the
proceeding.  Based upon his convincing testimony, demeanor, and commitment to
remain alcohol free in the future, along with the evidence in mitigation, as reflected by
the favorable statements from his professional colleagues and friends, as well as his
past record of security worthiness, there is sufficient evidence in the record to show that
he is sufficiently trustworthy at this time.  The likelihood of his misconduct in the past
being repeated is nil.
     
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that
the person may properly safeguard classified information.  Accordingly Guideline G is
found for the Applicant.  In the event that the Applicant continues to abuse alcohol, his
security clearance will be in serious jeopardy.
 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
7
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
CONCLUSION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
