1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 08-06150
SSN: ------------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for an industrial security clearance. The action
is based on Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties (delinquent debts),
which Applicant has yet to begin to address. The record contains insufficient evidence
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from her history of
financial problems, which are ongoing and unresolved. Accordingly, as explained in
more detail below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Tr. 7–9. 2
 Exhibits 4 and 5. 3
 Exhibit 5 (some of these accounts appear to be duplicates).4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on March 11, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the
factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F for
financial considerations. The SOR also recommended submitting the case to an
administrative judge for a determination to deny or revoke Applicant’s security
clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 1, 2009, and she requested a hearing.  The2
case was assigned to me on June 9, 2009. The hearing took place as scheduled on
July 15, 2009. The testimony of Applicant was taken, and Government Exhibits 1
through 6 were admitted. Applicant called no witnesses and offered no documentary
evidence. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received July 23, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged 41 delinquent debts for a total of about $32,000. In reply to the
SOR, Applicant admitted 16 of the 41 delinquent debts for a total of about $19,000.
Based on the record as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial
evidence.
Applicant is a 37-year-old aircraft mechanic. She has been continuously
employed by the same company since 1997. She is married and has two daughters,
ages 12 and 6. Her husband works in the auto business (both sales and mechanics),
and he has been unemployed for the last two months due to a business downturn.
Applicant is seeking to retain a clearance previously granted to her. 
Credit reports from 2008 establish (1) the debts alleged in the SOR, and (2) that
Applicant has a history of financial problems.  For example, the trade section of the3
March 2008 credit report has 102 accounts of which 62 are described as derogatory in
some way (in collection, past due, etc.).  The collection section of the same report has4
15 collection accounts with a total balance of about $16,768.
 Tr. 39. 5
 Tr. 39. 6
 Tr. 39.7
 Tr. 40–48.8
 Tr. 64. 9
 Tr. 56. 10
 Tr. 56. 11
 Tr. 58–59. 12
 Tr. 66. 13
 Tr. 59–60. 14
 Tr. 67. 15
 Tr. 67–68. 16
3
Concerning the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant denied 25 of the 41 debts (of
which 16 are medical accounts) because she did not recognize the creditor or the
amount or both.  She admitted that she had no documentation to show she was not5
responsible for the debts she denied.  Likewise, she admitted that she took no steps to6
address the debts after receiving the SOR.  Applicant has not made any payments on7
the debts she admitted.  Her general plan, which is yet to be implemented, is that she8
intends to pay her creditors when she has extra money starting with the smallest debt.9
In addition to the debts in the SOR, Applicant is about two months behind on her
$521 monthly car loan.  Her husband’s car, a 1999 Jaguar, is paid off.  Also, Applicant10 11
is indebted to the IRS for back taxes for tax years 2005 and 2007, and she is making
monthly payments per a repayment agreement with the IRS.  And Applicant is repaying12
a loan she took against her 401(k) account; this is the fourth such loan against the
account.13
Applicant has little money in the bank.  She described how she and her husband14
handle their money as “strangely.”  He is somewhat aware of her financial situation, but15
she is unaware of his financial situation.16
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to17
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 25
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).26
4
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As17
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,18
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An19
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  20
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting21
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An22
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate23
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme24
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.25
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.26
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.27
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating28
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 18.  29
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(a).  30
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(c). 31
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(e). 32
5
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the27
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant28
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  29
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
Applicant’s history of financial problems raises concerns because it indicates
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial30
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. Also, Applicant’s multiple accounts and31
excessive indebtedness establish a pattern of consistent spending beyond one’s
means.  The record establishes that Applicant has delinquent debts in excess of32
$30,000, and she has no means to address the debts in a meaningful way. These facts
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 33
6
and circumstances are more than sufficient to establish the three disqualifying
conditions noted above, and it suggests financial irresponsibility as well.
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns as follows:  33
The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control;
The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none apply to mitigate
and overcome the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems are not minor, and
they are ongoing and unresolved. And she is yet to implement a realistic plan to
address her indebtedness. Given these circumstances, it is too soon to tell if Applicant
will resolve her outstanding delinquent debts in a reasonable time and then continue to
be a financially responsible person. The likelihood of additional or continuing financial
problems cannot be ruled out. Indeed, Applicant (1) is now two months past due on an
auto loan, (2) owes the IRS back taxes for two tax years, and (3) is now repaying her
fourth loan against her 401(k) account. These facts, when combined with the SOR
indebtedness, show that her overall financial situation is unstable and headed toward
collapse or bankruptcy or both. These circumstances are plainly contrary to the clearly-
consistent standard I am required to apply. Accordingly, Guideline F is decided against
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).34
7
Applicant. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the nine-factor whole-
person concept.34
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant did not meet her ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided
against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.oo:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.      
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
