                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07528 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s available information is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 28, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On March 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
1  FORM Item 5. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified, and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be denied or revoked. 
 
On April 28, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated May 29, 2009, was provided to her 
by letter dated June 1, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on June 11, 2009. She was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. By letter dated July 28, 2009 (Applicant exhibit (AE) 1), she 
submitted material in refutation, extenuation, and mitigation in response to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, and 1.g. She 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h. Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old senior technical writer. She has been working for her 
current employer, a defense contractor, since September 2006.3 She attended college 
from June 1987 to June 1991, and received a Master’s degree from a prominent U.S. 
university. Applicant is currently single. She has been married and divorced three times, 
the first two times when she was in her twenties. She last married in 1989, and was 
divorced in 1995. According to her e-QIP answers, she has no children. 
 
Applicant’s work history can be summarized as follows: she was unemployed 
during five months in 1998. After that, she was self-employed and/or underemployed 
from September 1998 to November 2005. From November 2005 to May 2006, she 
worked for a government contractor. After that, she was mostly unemployed until she 
was hired by her current employer in September 2006.  
 
Applicant stated she was issued a Defense Department confidential security 
clearance, around April 1985, when she worked for a defense contractor. There is no 
evidence that she ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified 
information.  
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3  Item 5 (2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this decision, unless stated otherwise. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 
In her 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed she had three 
judgments against her that were outstanding. She also disclosed having financial 
problems and that she was trying to resolve them. Applicant’s background investigation 
addressed her financial problems and included the review of her February 2008 and 
October 2008 credit bureau reports (CBRs) and her answers to two 2008 DOHA 
interrogatories. The SOR alleges eight delinquent and/or charged-off accounts and 
judgments, totaling approximately $36,500. The delinquent debts were established by 
Applicant’s admissions and her two credit reports (Items 8 and 9).4 Most of the debts 
have been delinquent for many years. Four of the SOR allegations concerned 
outstanding judgments against Applicant. Three of the judgments were filed in 2002 and 
one in 2008.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleged an unpaid 2008 judgment owing $22,740. The debt originated 
from Applicant’s defaulted credit card account. She initially disputed the value of this 
debt without success. In 2008, Applicant retained legal counsel to help her resolve her 
judgments. In 2008, her attorney made settlement offers on four of her judgments, three 
of which were alleged as SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($690), 1.f ($1,011), and 1.g ($4,030). The 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was not included in the settlement offer.  
 
In her response to the FORM, she claimed her attorney settled the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and that she was making payments. In her SOR response she 
stated that her payments on this judgment were to start in May. Notwithstanding, she 
failed to present any documentary evidence to show she settled or that she is making 
payments on this judgment. In light of her financial history, Applicant’s uncorroborated 
statements are not sufficient to show she settled this judgment or that she is making 
payments. Applicant’s evidence shows, however, that she paid two other judgments, for 
$9,295 (Item 4) and $1,657 (Item 8 and 9), which were not alleged in her SOR. She 
paid the $9,295 judgment after the creditor started garnishing her pay in 2009. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a collection of $5,691. Applicant denied this debt. She averred 
this debt was duplicated as a $9,295 judgment in her CBRs, and that she paid it when 
she paid the judgment. Applicant’s evidence fails to establish that the paid $9,295 
judgment is the same debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b for the following reasons. In her May 
2008 statement to a background investigator, Applicant admitted she had two separate 
accounts with the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b on which judgments were obtained 
against her (Item 6, p. 4). Furthermore, a review of the CBRs indicates these two 
delinquent debts are two separate legal obligations to the same creditor. I find SOR ¶ 
1.b to be Applicant’s outstanding delinquent debt. 
 
Applicant formally disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($690) and 1.e 
($1,530) (Items 8 and 9), as indicated in the CBRs.  
 
 
4  An applicant’s credit report showing the delinquent debts alleged in an SOR is sufficient to 
establish the government’s prima facie case. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2003). 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleged a collection of $350 by a large retailer. In her answer to the 
SOR, Applicant denied this debt, stating that the debt was not legitimate and that it was 
removed from her CBRs. However, in her May 2008 statement to a background 
investigator, Applicant admitted this was her retail revolving account that she had used 
it to buy her clothing, and that she stopped paying it in 2002 (Item 6). Applicant 
presented no evidence this debt has been paid or resolved. I find that this debt is still 
outstanding. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($1,011) and 1.g ($4,030) alleged two outstanding judgments that 
Applicant admitted. She hired an attorney to help her to settle or resolve these 
accounts. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleged a collection of $500 on behalf of a bank. The debt is 
established by the February 2008 CBR (Item 9). Applicant claimed she did not have any 
accounts with that bank and denied the debt in her answer to the SOR. There is no 
evidence that she formally disputed the account. 
 
Applicant explained her financial problems were the result of a major financial 
downturn she suffered during the Information Technology (IT) decline in 2000-2002. 
After 2002, she was unemployed or underemployed until 2006, when she was hired by 
her current employer. Before 2006, she had low paying jobs and she did not have 
sufficient income to pay her day-to-day living expenses and her delinquent obligations. 
 
Applicant currently has a steady job and promised that she would be able to 
resolve her delinquent debts, and stay financially responsible in the future. She retained 
an attorney in 2007, to help her resolve some of her debts. In 2008, she retained 
another attorney to assist her with resolving her judgments. She claimed she has been 
working with a financial counselor to pay her delinquent debts. It is not clear whether 
she is talking about her attorneys or another financial counselor. Applicant’s CBRs show 
that she paid three delinquent and/or charged-off debts, formally disputed two other 
delinquent debts, and paid two judgments. Other than these accounts, Applicant 
presented little evidence of other paid debts, settlement agreements, or efforts to 
resolve her delinquent debts since she acquired them.  
 
Applicant admitted that she has not always used her best judgment addressing 
her debts and that she has failed to resolve her financial problems in a timely manner. 
She said that she was having problems identifying her legal creditors because of the 
duplication of her debts during the lengthy collection process.  
 
According to her October 2008, response to interrogatories, Applicant’s gross 
monthly salary was approximately $5,401, and her deductions were $1,957, for a net 
income of $3,444. Her monthly expenses totaled $1,485, and she was paying only three 
debts totaling $998. She had a net remainder of $961. Applicant has been borrowing 
money from her 401(k) retirement plan to meet the deficit caused by a garnishment of 
pay imposed in 2009.  
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Applicant is a patriotic citizen and never misses voting in a Presidential election. 
She was appointed by a state family court as a volunteer guardian ad litem. She 
believes she acted in good-faith because she started paying her delinquent judgments 
as soon as she had the income to do so. She also claimed she paid many debts in a 
timely manner. She failed to present documentary evidence to corroborate either of her 
claims. She also believes she is living in an austere and prudent manner. She claimed 
her debts were not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending, but due to the 
financial downturn she suffered during the IT decline. Applicant averred she has 
medical problems that prevented her from working more than one job. Her current 
employer made reasonable accommodations that permit Applicant to work full-time. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”5 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
 
5  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant has accumulated eight delinquent and/or charged-off accounts and 
judgments totaling approximately $36,500, most of which have been outstanding for 
many years. Four of the SOR allegations concern judgments filed against Applicant – 
three in 2002 and one in 2008. Applicant’s evidence of efforts to resolve her financial 
obligations is summarized as follows: she retained attorneys in 2007 and 2008 to help 
her resolve her debts; in 2008, her attorney proposed settlement agreements in four of 
her delinquent judgments; she paid two judgments (not alleged in the SOR); she paid 
three debts not alleged in the SOR; and she formally disputed two additional debts. She 
presented no other documentary evidence of efforts to pay or resolve any of the 
financial obligations alleged in the SOR.  
 
 
6  “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of 
not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. Her financial problems are ongoing and her evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence to establish circumstances beyond her 
control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, i.e., periods of unemployment, 
business downturn, and expenses caused by her medical condition. Applicant’s 
evidence of efforts to resolve her financial obligations is summarized as follows: she 
retained attorneys in 2007 and 2008 to help her resolve her debts. In 2008, her attorney 
proposed settlement agreements on four of her delinquent judgments. She paid two 
judgments and three debts, all of which were not alleged in the SOR. Also, she formally 
disputed two debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant presented no other corroborating 
documentary evidence of efforts to pay or resolve any of the financial obligations 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant has been consistently employed since September 2006. 
 
8 
 
 
Her favorable information fails to fully establish a track record of financial responsibility. 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are no clear indications that her 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. She presented evidence that she 
received financial counseling through her attorneys and that she started making some 
effort to resolve her financial problems in 2007. However, considering the number of 
delinquent debts, the date the debts were acquired (three are unpaid judgments dating 
back to 2002), the aggregate value of the debts, and the lack of corroborating 
documentary evidence of efforts to resolve her legal financial obligations prior to 2007, 
Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish that her financial problems are unlikely 
to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by the facts in 
this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for her four 
years working for government contractors. There is no evidence of any security 
violation, or that she ever compromised classified information. Applicant is a patriotic 
citizen and never misses voting in a Presidential election. She was appointed by a state 
family court as a volunteer guardian ad litem. These factors show some responsibility 
and mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. Applicant has not always used her best 
judgment addressing her debts. She has failed to show good-faith efforts to resolve her 
 
9 
 
 
financial problems in a timely manner. The sparse record evidence fails to convince me 
of Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and   Against Applicant 
   1.f - 1.h:       
  
 Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
