                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-05012 
SSN:----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 8, 2007, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On November 5, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing. Applicant submitted three Answers 
because the first two Answers did not respond to the allegations under Guideline E. 
Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
On May 12, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on May 14, 2009. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on May 22, 2009. 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time period allowed 
that expired on June 21, 2009. I received the case assignment on August 6, 2009. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant had to submit three Answers to the SOR because he neglected to 
respond to SOR Paragraph 2 in his first two Answers. In his first Answer, he denied the 
allegation in Subparagraph 1.o and admitted all other allegations. In the two subsequent 
Answers he admitted all allegations in Paragraph 1.  In his third Answer, he admitted 
the allegations in Paragraph 2. (Items 2-6)  
 
Applicant is 50 years old, married and divorced twice. He has five children from 
his two marriages. Applicant’s first divorce became final in 1990. His last divorce 
occurred in 2005. (Item 7) 
 
The SOR lists 19 delinquent debts. These debts total $115,241.75. The earliest 
delinquency date is 2002. Eight of these debts are owed to medical providers. 
Applicant’s interrogatory answers admitted that he has not made payments on any of 
the 19 debts. The file does not contain any evidence that Applicant made payments on 
his debts or attempted to resolve them. He offered as a defense the explanation that he 
has more debts than income. He also asserted in his three Answers to the SOR that he 
had medical problems in 2003, consisting of kidney problems and later a heart attack. 
Applicant cites unemployment as a contributing factor to his financial problems, but his 
SF-86 shows he was employed from March 1997 to November 2005, then unemployed, 
and gained new employment in November 2005 until April 2006. Next, he lost his job 
and was employed again in September 2006. He has been employed in his current job 
since April 2006. Applicant did not submit any evidence to support his medical 
conditions and unemployment contentions. (Items 2-6, 8-11)  
 
Applicant answered the SF 86 Question 28, subsections (a) and (b), with “No” 
responses. Question 28.a asked Applicant if he had been more than 180 days 
delinquent on any debt in the past seven years. Question 28.b inquired if Applicant was 
delinquent more than 90 days on any debt currently. Applicant admitted the allegations, 
and explained he did not intentionally falsify his answer to Question 28. Applicant 
claimed that he did not know what was on his credit report. He asserted that he may 
have hit the “skip” button on the computer electronic form on both questions. (Items 2, 
6, 11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially 
disqualifying; and,   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2002 to the present, Applicant accumulated 19 delinquent debts, totaling 
$115,241.75 that remain unpaid or unresolved.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. In the past 12 years, Applicant 
has been unemployed 11 months. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue. 
 
Applicant also offers his divorces as reasons for his delinquent debts, but fails 
again to explain how a four-year-old divorce affected his current debt delinquencies. 
Again, he failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
Lastly, Applicant contends his medical problems in 2003 caused some of his 
delinquent debt. Only eight debts were owed to medical providers, less than half the 
number of debts owed. Applicant failed to prove AG ¶ 20 (b) applied because he did not 
submit sufficient evidence of the conditions that he asserted were beyond his control 
and that he acted responsibly in resolving his delinquent debts during the time the debts 
were accumulating. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose his financial delinquencies as alleged in SOR 
Paragraph 1. He disclaims any intentional action in doing so. Applicant could not follow 
instructions in making his Answer to the SOR, and had to submit a total of three 
Answers to comply with the Directive. If he had difficulty following directions with regard 
 
 
 
 
 
6
to filing his Answer, it is reasonable to believe his explanation that he did not follow 
instructions on the SF 86. Applicant committed an inadvertent error, not a deliberate 
effort to mislead the Government. This guideline is found in his favor. Hence, it is not 
necessary to consider any mitigating condition.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. He did mitigate the security concerns under the guideline for 
Personal Conduct. I conclude the “whole person” concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
