                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-04552 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and 
foreign influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on May 2, 2007. On October 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the government’s 
security concerns under Guidelines C (foreign preference) and B (foreign influence). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6; Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 5, 2008, and requested that a 
decision be based on the written record. DOHA received Applicant’s answer to the SOR 
on November 7, 2008. Applicant reconsidered his request for a decision based on the 
written record, and on February 27, 2009, he requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 22, 2009. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on April 29, 2009, and was 
reassigned to me on May 11, 2009, due to caseload considerations. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on April 30, 2009, scheduling the case for May 19, 2009. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. I held the record open 
until May 26, 2009 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional materials. 
He timely submitted AE B through L, which were received without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2009.  
 
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice (Exhibit (Ex.) 
I(A)), requesting that I take administrative notice of the summary of facts contained in 
Ex. I(A) as well as those facts in Exs. I through XIII. Without objection from Applicant, I 
took administrative notice of the documents offered by Department Counsel, which 
pertained to India. Tr. 14-15.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) 
(listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to India 
were derived from Exs. I(A), and I through XIII as contained infra under the subheading 
“India” in this decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b., 
and 2.a. – 2.f. with explanations. He denied ¶¶ 1 and 2 with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old director of his company, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since June 1998. Tr. 21-22, GE 1. He is a first-time applicant for a 
security clearance. Tr. 22. He successfully held an interim secret security clearance for 
a brief period of time until it was revoked as a result of these proceedings. He received 
security training from his Facility Security Office in January 2007. Tr. 60-61. 
 
Applicant was born in April 1970 in India, where he was raised and educated. Tr. 
23-24, GE 1. He was awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree in Mathematics in July 1990, 
and a Master’s Degree in Computer Applications in July 1993 from universities in India. 
Tr. 18-20. 
 
In August 1993 at age 23, Applicant came to the U.S. on an F-1 Student Visa to 
attend graduate school. Tr. 18. He was awarded a Master’s Degree in Computer 
Science in August 2006. He completed his Ph.D. course work, got “sidetracked,” and 
did not complete his dissertation. Tr. 17, 46-47-48, GE 1. He applied for and received 
permanent resident alien status in August 2001 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in February 2007. Tr. 18, GE 1. He was issued his U.S. passport in June 2007. GE 2. 
 
Applicant married his wife, a family friend, in India in January 1997. Tr. 20-21, GE 
1. She was already in the U.S. on an F-1 Student Visa when they decided to get 
married and chose to have their wedding in India. Tr. 30. Applicant’s wife became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in February 2007. GE 1. They have one three-year-old 
daughter, who was born in the U.S., and is a U.S. citizen by birth. Tr. 21, GE 1. 
Applicant’s wife was awarded a Ph.D. in Public Administration in May 2009 from a 
prestigious U.S. university, and currently is not employed outside the home. Tr. 22-23. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline C that Applicant possessed a valid Indian 
passport with an expiration date of April 2010. Additionally, the SOR alleged Applicant 
intended to apply for Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) status before December 2008. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b.) Before the hearing, Applicant submitted documentation that his 
Indian passport had been destroyed. He also stated that as of November 4, 2008, he 
would not be applying for OCI status. He explained that OCI status is a travel 
convenience that would make it easier to visit family members in India. He added that it 
was not his intent to show any preference for India and hopes the reversal of his intent 
is sufficient proof of his preference for the U.S. Once he became aware of the 
government’s foreign preference concerns, he took corrective action. Response to 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
SOR. Department Counsel noted in his opening remarks that concerns under Guideline 
C had been resolved by Applicant’s Response to the SOR. Tr. 10. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant has three immediate family members, apart from his wife and child. 
Their relationship to Applicant is as follows: 
 
Mother. She was born in August 1947 in India, and is now 62. She is a resident 
and citizen of India. (SOR ¶ 2.a.) She is a retired middle school teacher and taught at a 
private missionary school. Tr. 24, 26, 64, GE 1. 
 
Father. He was born in May 1942 in India, and is now 67. He is a resident and 
citizen of India. (SOR ¶ 2.a.) He retired from a senior civil service position in 2002 and 
receives a pension from the Indian government. After retiring from his senior civil 
service position, he worked as an advisor to a government agency until approximately 
2005. After leaving his advisory position in 2005, he began his current position as head 
of an independent body that develops data protection standards for commercial 
companies operating within India. The organization is solely funded by its member 
companies and is not part of or under the control of the Indian government. He has 
never held a political position with the Indian government. Tr. 24-26, 32-39, Response 
to SOR, GE 1.  
 
Applicant’s father is a board member of at least seven companies in India. (SOR 
¶ 2.b.) With the exception of one of those companies, they all appear to be privately 
owned companies. The one company not privately owned is a utility company owned by 
a state government in India. Tr. 40-41, 51-52, GE 2, AE K, AE L, Response to SOR. 
 
Sister. She was born in February 1974 in India, and is now 35. She is a resident 
and citizen of India. She is employed as a vice president of a privately owned 
advertising company. (SOR ¶ 2.c.) Tr. 24-25, GE 1. She is married to a Bollywood script 
writer1 and has no children. Tr. 26, 31. 
 
Applicant communicates with his parents by telephone “[r]oughly once a week.” 
He communicates with his sister “typically” by telephone “[o]nce every three months, 
perhaps.” Tr. 27. 
 
Since moving to the U.S. in 1993, Applicant has traveled to India three times in 
February 2003, March 2004, and February 2006. Applicant paid for the first two trips, 
which were personal trips to visit family. His employer paid for the third trip, which was a 
                                                          
1 Bollywood is the informal term popularly used for the Hindi-language film industry based in 
Mumbai, India. The term is often incorrectly used to refer to the whole of Indian cinema; it is only a part of 
the Indian film industry. Bollywood is the largest film producer in India and one of the largest centers of 
film production in the world. The name is a portmanteau of Bombay (the former name for Mumbai) and 
Hollywood, the center of the American film industry. Available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bollywood. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
business trip; however, Applicant was able to see his parents during this trip. Tr. 27-29. 
(SOR ¶ 2.e.) Applicant’s parents came to the U.S. to visit Applicant and his family in 
December 2008. Tr. 42. 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law was born in April 1943 in India, and is now 66. (SOR ¶ 
2.d.) She is a resident and citizen of India. She is a retired liaison officer, who worked 
for a government-funded independent utility board for a state within India. Applicant 
speaks to his mother-in-law by telephone “every three months;” however, his wife 
speaks to her “typically once a week.” Tr. 29-30, GE 2. She came to the U.S. to visit 
Applicant and his family “some time in 2007.” Tr. 45. Applicant’s father-in-law is 
deceased. 
 
Applicant’s wife has one brother (Applicant’s brother-in-law), who is a legal 
resident of in the U.S. and a citizen of India. He is unmarried and works as a product 
manager for a major internet travel search engine. Applicant speaks to his brother-in-
law law “every two or three months;” however, his wife speaks to him “every couple of 
days.” It is Applicant’s understanding that his brother-in-law intends to remain in the 
U.S. Tr. 31-32, 50. 
 
 All of Applicant’s assets are in the U.S. He and his wife own a home with an 
estimated value of $350,000. His has various bank accounts, 401k retirement and cash 
balance retirement plans totaling $170,000. He estimates his net worth to be $250,000. 
Tr. 42-44, 51. Applicant’s annual salary is $135,000. Tr. 60. Apart from work and 
spending time with his family, Applicant has limited discretionary free time, but does 
make time to exercise. Tr. 45-46. Applicant is registered to vote, pays federal and state 
taxes, and otherwise exercises all rights of U.S. citizenship. Tr. 47, 50-GE 2. 
 
 Applicant does not have any other close and continuing contact with anyone else 
holding foreign citizenship. None of the relatives discussed supra are aware that 
Applicant is under consideration for a security clearance. No one has approached 
Applicant with a request or a solicitation to provide classified, sensitive, or proprietary 
information. Applicant does not have any preference, sympathy, or alliances with foreign 
interests or governments because of his association with his relatives in India. If 
Applicant were approached by anyone seeking classified information, he would report 
such contact to his Facility Security Officer. Tr. 61-62, GE 2. 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant submitted a reference letter from his supervisor/senior company 
manager. The supervisor has known Applicant for 11 years and stated Applicant in his 
current role as Director “has shown the ability to successfully lead teams towards 
completing their assignments. [Applicant] is able to motivate people and is able to get 
them to perform to the best of their abilities.” He concluded by saying that he has no 
reservations in recommending Applicant for a security clearance because “he has the 
required traits that will allow him to safeguard information pertaining to matters of 
national security.” AE I.  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
Additionally, a client and chief systems engineer of his company submitted a 
reference letter on behalf of Applicant. He stated that Applicant was one of two 
individuals from his company who “have contributed materially to verification of 
technology maturity in one of the most critically important aspects of [name] network 
performance,” and that they are “resources to the [name] program as a whole.” AE J. 
Applicant submitted nine years (2003-2009) of employee evaluations that document 
above average performance and fully support the positive comments contained in the 
reference letters. AE B – H. 
 
India2 
 
India and the U.S. have had close relations ever since India obtained its 
independence from Great Britain in 1947. India is not hostile to the U.S., nor are its 
interests inimical to the United States. Currently, the U.S. is India’s largest trading 
partner and largest investment partner. India provides $126 million in annual 
development assistance. India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a 
prominent voice in international affairs, and its growing industrial base, military strength, 
and scientific and technical capacity on issues from trade to environmental protection 
are indications that India’s power will continue to increase.  
 
India, the world’s most populous democracy, has a federal form of government, 
similar to the United States, but with more authority vested in the central government. It 
has a bicameral legislature modeled after Britain’s parliament, and its members are 
selected through open elections involving several political parties. India also has an 
active market-oriented economy, and conducts most of its international trade with the 
U.S.  
 
The U.S. recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to 
strengthen its relationship with India. Since the end of the Cold War, India has been an 
advocate of issues important to non-aligned nations, and is a member of the South 
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). During the Cold War, the U.S. 
tried to establish a closer relationship with India immediately after Indian independence 
in 1947 until 1954 when the non-aligned movement was formed. A second attempt at a 
closer relationship was made in 1962 following a skirmish between India and China over 
the border. Both the U.S. and India share a concern over the growth of China. Over the 
past five years, the two countries have been closer partners than anytime previously. 
However, there are concerns about India’s relations with Iran, including India’s 
increasing cooperation with the Iranian military.  
 
Throughout its history, India’s caste system, multi-cultural and multi-ethnic 
population, and the vestiges of colonial domination have challenged India’s ability to 
govern certain parts of the country. India is one of the most terror-afflicted countries in 
the world. In 2008, more than 2300 people died from terrorist incidents in India. 
Terrorism is mainly concentrated in Kashmir, a disputed area bordering Pakistan where 
 
2 The contents of this section are taken in whole or in part from Exs. I(A), I-XIII. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
radical Muslim activists are present; central India, where Maoist rebels are fighting on 
behalf of landless laborers; and southern India, where Hindus and Muslims periodically 
clash. As a result of sometimes violent separatist movements, provincial law 
enforcement authorities and military militias have used excessive force to maintain 
order and defeat domestic terrorism. Terrorism and separatist activities are generally 
done in furtherance of internal issues, and are most violent in limited and remote 
geographic regions. Despite these problems, India is still an open society in which the 
rule of law is prominent.  
 
India considers defeating terrorism and combating violent religious extremism as 
a critical shared security interest with the U.S. In 2000, the U.S. and India formed a joint 
working group on counterterrorism. It meets annually and is devoted to extending 
cooperation on areas such as bioterrorism, aviation security, cyber-security, terrorism, 
weapons of mass destruction terrorism, and terrorist financing. In 2002, the U.S. and 
India organized a cyber security forum to safeguard critical infrastructures from attack.  
 
There are differences between the U.S. and India over India’s nuclear weapons 
program. The two governments continue to work closely in pursuit of mutual interests in 
such issues as international management of nuclear technology, and preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Indian government buys most of its nuclear 
technology from the U.S., and it has an excellent record when it comes to protecting its 
nuclear arsenal.  
 
The growth of the U.S. and India’s economic ties has been accompanied by a 
corresponding growth in their strategic relationship. In 2005, a U.S. - India Joint 
Statement asserted that, as a responsible state with advanced nuclear technology, India 
should acquire the same benefits and advantages as other such states. In 2006, 
Congress passed the Henry J. Hyde United States - India Peaceful Atomic Cooperation 
Act, which allows direct civilian nuclear commerce with India for the first time in 30 
years. This agreement “opens the door” for American and Indian firms to participate in 
each other’s civil energy sector. Specifically, it enables India to buy U.S. nuclear 
reactors and fuel for civilian use. Also, it removed and/or revised several U.S. export 
requirements for dual-use and civil nuclear items.  
 
In July 2007, the U.S. and India successfully negotiated an agreement on 
peaceful nuclear cooperation. This deal is more far-reaching than the Hyde Act. In 
August 2007, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) approved the agreement. 
It has not yet been approved by the 45-member Nuclear Suppliers Group, a group 
composed of countries that have nuclear energy capabilities that must approve such an 
agreement under international law. Neither the U.S. Congress nor the Indian parliament 
has ratified the deal.  
 
Since 2002, the U.S. and India have held a series of “unprecedented and 
increasingly substantive” combined exercises involving all military services. These 
exercises ensure stability in southern and southwest Asia and have enabled the U.S. to 
get a “first look” at fighter jets that Russia designed and sold to India. More than 100 
U.S. Special Forces soldiers have undergone counterinsurgency jungle warfare training 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
conducted by the Indian military. For the past seven years, the U.S. and Indian navies 
have participated in joint naval exercises conducted near the Indian coast.  
 
India purchases more weapons systems than any other developing country. India 
purchases the majority of its weapons systems from Russia and Israel. The U.S. began 
selling weapons systems to India in 2002. In 2007, a U.S. defense contractor negotiated 
a $1 billion dollar deal with India for the purchase of military transport aircraft along with 
related equipment, training and services. In January 2008, the U.S. approved the deal. 
Currently, U.S. defense contractors are competing with weapons manufacturers from 
other countries for a contract to sell multi-role, combat aircraft to India. The deal when 
consummated “could be worth” $10 billion.  
 
Although the Indian government generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens, there remain numerous serious problems and significant human rights abuses. 
India’s human rights record has often been uneven. Police and security forces have 
engaged in extrajudicial killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and 
rape. A lack of accountability permeated the government and security forces, creating 
an atmosphere in which human rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent 
attacks have been committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups.  
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and equipment that 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive 
U.S. technology by foreign private entities does not slow its flow to foreign governments 
or its use in military applications.  
 
The United States government encourages small and medium size companies to 
expand their business opportunities in India. Many U.S.-based companies, including 
large computer service and software development companies, have subsidiary 
companies and do business in India. Indian immigrants are the fastest growing legal 
group of immigrants in the U.S. The Indian-American community is well-entrenched in 
several U.S. business sectors.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the Government’s concern: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 sets out one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
 At the time the SOR was issued, Applicant held a valid Indian passport, and he 
expressed an intent to apply for OCI status before December 2008. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b.) 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) has been raised by the evidence.  
 
 One foreign preference mitigating condition under AG ¶ 11 potentially mitigates 
this disqualifying condition: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
As noted by Department Counsel, Applicant took corrective action to mitigate this 
concern after being made aware of the government’s concern by destroying his Indian 
passport and withdrawing his intent, in writing, to apply for OCI status. Mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 11(e) is applicable, and for reasons discussed supra, Applicant has fully 
mitigated this concern. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent 
contact with his parents and sister. These close relationships create a potential risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion meriting a close 
examination of all circumstances. 
 
 The government produced substantial evidence of these two disqualifying 
conditions as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
government established Applicant’s parents and sister are resident citizens of India, and 
that Applicant maintains frequent contact with them by telephone and travel. 
Additionally, Applicant’s father was a senior career civil servant employed by the Indian 
government and in his post-government employment is active in the 
telecommunications and computer field in the private sector. The burden shifted to 
Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
 
 Two foreign influence mitigating conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applying common sense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, and/or obligation to his immediate family. ISCR 
Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has demonstrated the indicia of ties of affection for and/or 
obligation to his parents and sister by telephone contact as well as his travel to India in 
2003, 2004, and 2006. His parents and mother-in-law have also visited him in the U.S.  
 
Applicant’s mother is retired and is not associated with or affiliated with the Indian 
government. His father is a retired senior civil servant and receives a government 
pension from the Indian government. His post-retirement position as head of an Indian 
body that develops data protection standards for commercial companies operating 
within India is funded by member companies and is not part of or under the control of 
the Indian government. Although a board member of at least seven companies, only 
one company appears not to be privately owned, but rather is owned by a state 
government versus the federal government of India. 
 
His sister is vice president of a privately owned advertising company and his 
brother-in-law is a Bollywood script writer. Neither his sister nor brother-in-law is 
associated with or affiliated with the Indian government. The record does not identify 
what influence, if any, the Indian government could exert on Applicant’s parents and 
sister as a result of their being resident citizens of India. However, their presence in 
India and Applicant’s foreign travel creates concerns under this Guideline. As such, the 
burden shifted to Applicant to show his relatives in India and travel there does not 
create security risks.  
 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “India,” India has engaged in economic espionage 
and has had cordial relations with governments hostile to the U.S. Notably, the affects 
of terrorism have been felt within India’s borders. 
 
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the U.S. and any foreign 
country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. was not challenged in this 
proceeding.  
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
On balance, Applicant has not met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
that [his relationship with his parents and sister] could create a risk for foreign influence 
or exploitation.” The nature of the India’s government and its ongoing intelligence 
gathering activities against the U.S. places Applicant in just this position, given his close 
relationship with his family and their continued presence and connection with India. 
Accordingly, mitigating conditions 8(a) does not apply. However, Applicant’s deep and 
longstanding relationships with and within the U.S. warrant application of mitigating 
condition 8(b).  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
  In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, 
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”3 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) that are 
used for “whole person” analysis.  
 
Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of 
participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of 
the nine APFs to this adjudication.4 In addition to the eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the 
clearance decision is an overall commonsense determination. Directive ¶ E2.2.3.    
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis to address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
 
 I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal 
connections to India. Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole 
person analysis. India has at times engaged in conduct contrary to U.S. interests such 
3 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
as illegal export, or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted dual-use technology to 
India. India also has a mixed human rights record. India may attempt to use Applicant’s 
parents and sister who live in India to obtain such information. Also, Applicant spent his 
formative years in India. He has visited India three times recently in 2003, 2004, and 
2006. Although Applicant has no immediate plans to visit India, he did not rule out 
visiting India in the future. Applicant also maintains frequent contact with his family 
members in India. These contacts and visits are manifestations of the strong affection 
and regard Applicant has for family members in India.    
  
There is mitigating evidence that weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant immigrated to the U.S. when he was 23 years old, and received 
the major portion of his graduate education in the U.S. He has lived in the U.S. for the 
past 16 years, and has one U.S.-born child. His assets in the U.S. are substantial in 
contrast to having no assets in India. He is a U.S. citizen and U.S. passport holder. His 
wife is a U.S. citizen. His brother-in-law is a “green card” holder, who intends to remain 
in the U.S. and apply for U.S. citizenship when eligible. His ties to the United States are 
stronger than his ties to his parents and sister in India. There is no evidence Applicant 
has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. He 
takes his loyalty to the United States very seriously, and he has worked diligently for a 
defense contractor since June 1998. The evidence contains no derogatory record 
evidence about the Applicant. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India and the government’s 
material relating to India. I conclude that, in the unlikely event that Applicant’s family in 
India could be subject to coercion or duress from the Indian government in an attempt to 
obtain sensitive information, Applicant, because of his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the United States. Noteworthy is Applicant’s 
cooperation and willingness to address the government’s concern as it pertains to his 
possession of an Indian passport and intent to apply for OCI status. When he became 
aware of the government’s concerns, he took prompt corrective action to address those 
concerns. I also considered his character evidence, years of loyal and honorable 
service working for a defense contractor, and potential for future service. 
  
This case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
under the facts presented that the Indian government or its agents might exploit or 
attempt to exploit Applicant’s family members in such a way that this U.S. citizen would 
have to choose between his pledged loyalty to the U.S. and those family members. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence and preference.   
 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:  For Applicant 
 
 
                  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.f.: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
