 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07988 
                                                            )                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Charles Tucker, Jr., Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. However, he failed to 
mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant executed a security clearance application (SF-86) on October 3, 2001. 
On January 2, 2008, he completed and signed a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions 
(Questionnaire). On April 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 On May 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 10, 2009, and I convened a hearing on 
August 10, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no 
witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 4 and 
admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf, called 
four witnesses, and introduced eight exhibits, which were marked Exs. A through H. 
Applicant’s exhibits were admitted to the record without objection.  
 
 To conform the allegation at SOR ¶ 3(c) with facts elicited at the hearing, 
Department Counsel moved to amend the allegation to read: “In or about April 2005, 
you misused a cellular phone issued by . . . [your federal] employer, by incurring over 
$20,000 in personal phone charges.1 As of September 16, 2008, the balance was 
approximately $19,245.24.” The amendment to the SOR was approved without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on August 14, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG H, Drug 
Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.); two allegations of disqualifying conduct under 
AG J, Criminal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.); three allegations of disqualifying 
conduct under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 3.a. through 3.c.); and one allegation 
of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶ 4.a.). In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three allegations under AG H; he denied the 
two allegations under AG J; he admitted the three allegations under AG E; and he 
admitted the one allegation under AG F. He also provided additional information. 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old, never married, and employed as a senior consultant by 
a government contractor. In 2001, he earned a bachelor’s degree, and in 2002, he 
acquired a position as a contract special investigator. In that job, he was responsible for 
investigating the backgrounds of individuals who applied for security clearances. In 
order to carry out these duties, he was granted a security clearance. He was also 
subject to random drug tests. (Ex. 2; Tr. 134-136.)  
 
 Applicant left his job as a special investigator in 2003 and accepted federal 
employment as a special agent. His duties required that he hold a security clearance. 
For two years, he was assigned to a field office. In April 2005, he was assigned to a 
security detail in a foreign country for approximately 45 days. While on this assignment, 
Applicant was told he could use his government cell phone to make short personal calls, 
and he was informed that incoming calls were free. During the 45 days he was assigned 
in the foreign country, Applicant accrued between $25,000 and $30,000 in charges on 
 
1 The amendment deleted “April 2006” and substituted instead “April 2005.” In this narrative, I have 
deleted the name of  the federal agency involved  to protect Applicant’s privacy. 
 
3 
 
 
his government cell phone. His agency demanded repayment, and Applicant complied. 
He made some payments to the agency, which were returned to him. The agency 
reported that Applicant had paid $2,784 on the debt as of August 3, 2009. The current 
balance on the account is $18,892. Applicant has been making regular payments on the 
debt, and the agency does not consider the debt to be delinquent. To date, he believes 
he has had paid about $5,000 to the agency to satisfy the debt.  (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; 
Ex. 3 at 8-9; Ex. F; Tr. 115-123, 141,145, 155.) 
 
 In October 2005, as a special agent licensed to carry a firearm, Applicant was 
assigned to the security detail of a high government official. On a weekend in March 
2006, while off-duty, he and two friends traveled in Applicant’s automobile to an Eastern 
U.S. city to celebrate his birthday. During the trip, Applicant used marijuana belonging to 
one of his friends. The friend stored two or three small bags of marijuana in the console 
of Applicant’s car.  (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Tr. 146-147.) 
 
 As Applicant and his friends were returning from their trip, his car was pulled over 
by police. As the police were approaching his vehicle, Applicant opened the console to 
retrieve his badge, which he intended to show to the police officers. He saw the bags of 
marijuana and put them in his pocket. (Ex. 3 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant had his duty weapon with him in his automobile. When the officers saw 
the weapon under a seat, they ordered Applicant and his two friends out of the car. 
They ordered the three men to lie down on the ground between Applicant’s car and the 
police car. In his response to DOHA interrogatories, dated September 18, 2008, 
Applicant reported the following: 
 
While on the ground, I was still scared, so I threw the small bags of 
marijuana under the police car. A few minutes went by and I saw an officer 
pull out a very, very small amount of marijuana in a plastic bag from my 
car. Then, we were all handcuffed and our rights were read out to us. One 
officer picked me up, took my handcuffs off of me and handed me my 
badge. An officer took me to the side and asked, “Who[se] marijuana is it 
and who was smoking?” [My companions] both have young children. I 
didn’t want their families [to] have to suffer and them [to] get into any 
trouble that would put their families in a bad position. So, I told the police 
the marijuana was mine and I was the only one smoking.  I was given a 
sobriety test and passed it.  
     
One of the police vehicles pulled off and an officer spotted the small bags 
of marijuana I threw under the car. He asked me if they were mine and I 
never responded. Then, I was taken to a police car and transported to the 
police station. 
 
(Ex. 3 at 8; Tr. 103-104.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of Marijuana Under 50 
Grams. In the jurisdiction where Applicant was arrested, the drug possession charge  
was identified as “a disorderly person offense,” a misdemeanor. On the advice of his 
attorney, he pleaded guilty. He was fined about $833, sentenced to six months 
probation with drug tests, and granted a conditional discharge, which was dismissed in 
about January 2007. (Ex. 3 at 8; Ex. 4; Tr. 109-110, 147.)  
 
  The officers who arrested Applicant informed his employer of the arrest.  When 
Applicant reported for duty on the first work day following his arrest, he was given a 
drug test and tested positive for marijuana. Applicant’s security clearance was revoked. 
He was removed from his job as a special agent and reassigned to a non-sensitive 
position. He resigned from the agency in October 2006. (Tr. 137-139, 145-148.) 
 
 Applicant stated that his arrest in March 2006 was his first negative encounter 
with law enforcement. He stated that his one and only use of marijuana occurred on the 
night he was arrested. He denied using illegal drugs of any kind during his adolescent 
and college years. He asserted that he would never use illegal drugs in the future. He 
has limited his social contacts with the individuals with whom he used marijuana in 
March 2006. Additionally, he asserted that his conduct during the search and arrest was 
cooperative and professional. He also suggested that the officers who stopped his car 
on March 12, 2006, did so without a valid reason to arrest him. (Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 105-109, 
111-113; 149-150.) 
 
 Four character witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. Two witnesses were 
childhood friends of the Applicant. All four witnesses spoke highly of Applicant and 
stated that he was not a drug user. (Tr. 35-81.) 
 
 Applicant also provided letters of character reference from individuals who knew 
him well. They too attested to his good character and reliability. His contractor team 
lead described him as an “excellent worker” who “is always courteous, helpful, and 
dedicated.” Applicant’s performance review for the period of March 2008 through 
December 2008 indicated an overall rating of 4, identified as “exceeds expectations in 
all key areas.” (Ex. A through Ex. E, Ex. G.) 
 
 Applicant’s current annual salary is $73,542. His take home pay is about $3,600 
per month. He resides in his parent’s home.  Recently, Applicant became a father. He 
pays the mother of his child $1,100 a month in child support. He pays his debts, and 
has no delinquencies. (Ex. H; Tr.140,156-164.) 
 
                                                          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
5 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG  ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
The record shows that Applicant admitted the illegal use and possession of 
marijuana in March 2006. He tested positive for that illegal drug use, which occurred 
while he held a security clearance. This conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  It also raises security concerns about his ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal 
drug use raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), 25(c), and 25(g).2  
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used, abstaining from drug use for an 
appropriate period, and signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation of 
his security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable.  
 
The record shows that Applicant’s drug use is not recent and, according to his 
testimony, occurred only once. Applicant stated he had not used marijuana since his 
one-time use in March 2006, and he provided testimonial evidence corroborating his 
statement about his abstinence from friends and others who knew him socially. 
 
2 AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(b) reads: “testing positive for 
illegal drug use.” AG ¶ 25(c) reads: “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” AG¶ 25(g) reads: “any illegal drug use 
after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant stated he had changed his behavior and activities after his use of marijuana in 
March 2006 and his subsequent decision to abstain from illegal drugs. 
 
However, when Applicant used marijuana in 2006, he was a mature adult of 28 
years, and he had held a security clearance for approximately four years. During those 
four years, he worked as a special investigator and as a special agent, occupations that 
require maturity, stability, and good judgment. In his work as a special investigator, he 
was thoroughly familiar with the security concerns related to illegal drug use because 
he was required to inquire about and investigate illegal drug use by individuals who 
sought access to classified information. As a special agent, he had been authorized to 
carry a firearm and to protect a high government official. With this background, his 
decision to use marijuana even once three years ago, while entrusted with a security 
clearance as a federal law enforcement officer, raises serious questions about his 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Even though he expressed remorse for his 
behavior and the negative impact it had on his career, he also suggested that his arrest 
was unwarranted. I conclude that insufficient time has passed to demonstrate a positive 
and permanent change in behavior. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not fully 
apply in mitigation to the security concerns raised by the facts in Applicant’s case. 
 
 Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶ 30. 
 
  In March 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of 
Marijuana Under 50 Grams, a misdemeanor crime identified as a disorderly person 
offense. He pled guilty and was fined about $833, sentenced to six months probation 
with drug tests, and granted a conditional discharge. The charge was dismissed in 
January 2007. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted this criminal conduct. 
 
  Applicant’s criminal behavior raises a security concern under AG ¶ 31(c). AG ¶ 
31(c) reads: “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
  Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions might apply to the Applicant’s case.  
If “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply.  If 
“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
 
8 
 
 
  Applicant averred that his use of illegal drugs occurred only once in his life: on 
the night in March 2006 when he was arrested and charged with Possession of 
Marijuana Under 50 Grams. Since that time, he has had no other arrests or charges of 
illegal drug use or possession, and the record reflects no other criminal conduct of any 
kind by Applicant. He has demonstrated a good employment record, and his recent 
performance evaluation shows he exceeds his employer’s expectations in all key areas.  
I conclude Applicant’s criminal conduct has been mitigated by the passage of time and 
he has demonstrated successful rehabilitation. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(c) apply in 
mitigation to the criminal conduct allegations in this case. 
   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 In 2005, when Applicant was assigned overseas as a federal law enforcement 
officer, his employer gave him permission to use his official cell phone to make brief 
personal phone calls back to the United States. Within a period of about 45 days, 
Applicant’s personal use of his official phone caused his employer to be charged 
between $25,000 and $30,000. This excessive use suggested that Applicant was 
inattentive to his responsibility to follow his employer’s instructions and rules for making 
prudent use of government resources. 
 
 In March 2006, Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance as a 
federal law enforcement officer. While Applicant asserted that his demeanor was 
cooperative and professional when he was stopped and searched by police, his own 
account in his response to interrogatories reveals he behaved in ways that were 
intended to obstruct justice and confuse the arresting officers. Before the police 
approached his car, Applicant reached in the console, grabbed three bags of marijuana, 
and put them in his pocket. He didn’t want the police to discover the marijuana. Later, 
when he was on the ground and the police were searching his car, he took the bags of 
marijuana from his pocket and threw them under the police car so the police would not 
find them. When a police officer later discovered the bags of marijuana on the ground, 
he  asked Applicant if they belonged to him. Applicant did not respond to the officer’s 
question. When he carried out these actions, Applicant was an off-duty federal law 
enforcement officer. When he reported these facts in response to DOHA interrogatories 
in September 2008, he expressed remorse in a personal sense but did not discuss how 
this conduct contradicted his duties and responsibilities as a federal law enforcement 
officer.   
 
 
9 
 
 
 When Applicant’s employer learned of his arrest for marijuana possession, it 
required that he submit to a drug test. The drug test revealed Applicant’s marijuana use, 
and his employer revoked his security clearance. 
 
 The allegations in the SOR raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(d)(4) and  
16(e)(1). AG ¶ 16(d)(4) reads:  
 
Credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient in itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of. . . (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or 
other employer’s time or resources.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about 
one’s conduct, that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . .” 
 
  Several Guideline mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c) if “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  
 
  AG ¶ 17(d) might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if 
“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  AG ¶ 17(f) might apply if “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” Finally, AG ¶ 17(g) might 
apply in mitigation if “association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations.” 
 
Applicant has expressed regret for the behavior that led to the large cell phone 
indebtedness and the revocation of his security clearance. He provided documentation 
showing that he was addressing the cell phone debt he owes to the federal agency 
where he worked as a special agent. He asserted he has no intention to use illegal 
drugs in the future, and he stated that while he occasionally sees the individuals with 
whom he used marijuana in March 2006, he does not actively socialize with them 
anymore. 
 
10 
 
 
 
Applicant’s failure to follow his employer’s instructions about the use of his 
government cell phone and his use of marijuana while holding a security clearance was 
consequential and occurred in 2005 and 2006. The information about these acts was 
credible and provided by his former agency and a police department in the jurisdiction 
where he was arrested and charged with illegal drug possession. These acts did not 
occur under such unique circumstances that they would not seriously raise concerns 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment and perhaps impact his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant failed to provide documentation that he had 
taken positive steps that might alleviate the circumstances that caused his unreliable 
conduct and, as a result, such behavior was unlikely to recur. Nothing in the record 
suggests that Applicant took positive steps to reduce or eliminate the vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress that his behavior caused. I conclude that AG ¶ 
17(g) applies in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case but that AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 
17(e) and 17(f) are not applicable . 
 
Because almost every aspect of a person’s life can be evaluated generally as a 
security concern under Personal Conduct, I have considered all of the facts in this case 
from a Personal Conduct perspective. I find that when Applicant’s conduct is viewed 
from a whole person perspective, questions remain about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. 
 
The SOR alleged that a financial considerations security concern arose over 
Applicant’s cell phone debt of approximately $19,245 to his former employer. However, 
at his hearing, Applicant provided documentation to corroborate his statement that he 
was making timely payments to the agency to satisfy the debt. No other financial 
delinquencies were alleged. I conclude that Applicant rebutted the financial 
considerations security concern alleged in the SOR. 
 
11 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s one-time use of 
marijuana was not simply an isolated use of an illegal drug. He used the drug as an off-
duty federal law enforcement officer who held a security clearance. When his car was 
stopped by police who undertook to search his car for illegal drugs, Applicant took 
evasive action to hide the drugs from the police and to deter their investigation. His 
primary concern was to protect himself and his friends from the consequences of their 
illegal drug use. In September 2008, he reported this information to DOHA in response 
to interrogatories, but he did not accept responsibility, as a federal law enforcement 
officer, for obstructing a police search. This raises continuing concerns about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant has expressed an intent to abstain from illegal drug use in the future. 
He is considered an excellent worker by his present employer. He does not actively 
socialize with the two individuals with whom he used marijuana in 2006. He is paying 
his former employer regularly to satisfy the debt he incurred for unauthorized use of a 
government cell phone. 
 
I have considered all available, reliable information in the record about Applicant, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making this decision. At his hearing, I 
carefully observed Applicant’s demeanor and I assessed his credibility.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
drug involvement and personal conduct.  
 
12 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
