                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04062 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
From November 2006 to April 2007, Applicant submitted false time cards to his 
employer. He was caught and resigned to avoid termination. He misled two 
investigators and falsified his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) about leaving his 
employment under adverse circumstances. Personal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 18, 2005, Applicant submitted an SF-86 (e-QIP version) (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1). On October 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct (GE 9). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
On December 3, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (GE 10). On March 24, 2009, DOHA issued an Amended 
SOR to Applicant adding two additional Guideline E allegations. On April 2, 2009, 
Applicant responded to the Amended SOR (Transcript (Tr.) 13-15; GE 13). 
 
On March 25, 2009, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On April 2, 
2009, the case was assigned to another administrative judge. On May 4, 2009, the case 
was transferred to me for caseload reasons. On May 8, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice setting the hearing for June 15, 2009 (GE 8). The hearing was held on June 15, 
2009, as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered seven exhibits (GE 1-7) (Tr. 24-26), 
and Applicant offered 11 exhibits (Tr. 89-92; AE A-P). Applicant’s counsel objected to 
the admissibility of the summaries of Applicant’s interviews taken on February 21, 2008, 
and November 17, 2008. I overruled the objections, and I admitted GE 1-7 (Tr. 25-26, 
54, 72, 74). Department Counsel objected to admissibility of documents relating to 
Applicant’s sleep disorder because of lack of relevance to the SOR allegations; and 
because two Wikipedia articles (AE H, I) have low reliability (Tr. 92-93, 115). I overruled 
the objections and admitted AE A-P (Tr. 93, 115). Additionally, I admitted the hearing 
notice, SOR, response to the SOR, designation of attorney, and entry of appearance 
(GE 8-12). I also admitted the SOR amendment and Applicant’s response to 
amendment of the SOR (GE 13). On June 23, 2009, I received the hearing transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted in his SOR response that he mischarged the hours on his 
timecard, and he resigned in April 2007 prior to administration of disciplinary action 
(SOR ¶ 1.a; GE 10). He denied the remainder of the SOR allegations (GE 10). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old test and evaluation engineer employed by a defense 
contractor (Tr. 141-142). His primary responsibility is software integration testing (Tr. 
142). He started working for his current employer (N) in October 2007 (Tr. 143, 158). 
 
Applicant received the Eagle Scout award when he was 13 years old (Tr. 144; 
AE B). In February 2005, he graduated from one of the top engineering universities in 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
the United States (Tr. 145; AE A). He received an award from a university for an aircraft 
design (Tr. 145-146; AE C). In college, Applicant had problems with oversleeping and 
missing class as well as falling asleep during class (Tr. 146-147). In July 2005, he 
began his first employment after college with R, a large defense contractor (Tr. 148).     
 
Falsification of time cards and resignation from employment (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
  
 Applicant had difficulty getting to work on time (Tr. 149). Sometimes he could not 
wake up until 3:00 pm (Tr. 149). Self-help strategies, such as multiple alarm clocks, 
special pillows, a special mattress, and vitamin supplements, were not successful in 
Applicant awakening and getting to work on time (Tr. 149-150). In January 2007, O, his 
administrative supervisor at R, placed Applicant on a performance improvement plan 
(PIP) (Tr. 151-152). Failure to improve under the PIP was possible grounds for 
termination (Tr. 196). He told O he was having trouble sleeping (Tr. 152-153). He was 
required to be at work by 9:00 am (Tr. 152). 
 
On April 18, 2007, O told Applicant that R’s badge reader was inconsistent with 
the time he provided on his time cards (Tr. 153, 198; GE 3). He admitted that the hours 
he reported on his time cards were not the hours he actually worked (Tr. 153; GE 3). He 
claimed on his time cards that he worked 40 hours a week; however, he did not actually 
work 40 hours (Tr. 197). He claimed he worked eight hours each day; however, in 
reality he worked less (Tr. 197). He provided false time cards to conceal that he was 
coming in late for work, and he did not want to be terminated from his employment (Tr. 
154).   
 
O told Applicant that based on his past good performance he would be permitted 
to resign before they pursued termination (Tr. 154). Applicant chose to resign and he 
left employment with R at the end of the week (Tr. 199, 201). His technical supervisors 
at R described his work in positive terms (Tr. 155-157). O said the circumstances of his 
departure would remain confidential within R (Tr. 155, 200). No other employees at R 
were supposed to know about his true reasons for leaving employment at R (Tr. 158).  
Applicant resigned from R effective April 20, 2007 (Tr. 206-207; GE 3). If not for the 
time-card fraud, he would not have resigned from R on April 20, 2007 (Tr. 207).  
 
Applicant’s sleep disorder 
 
 A highly-qualified medical doctor (M), who is board certified in internal medicine 
and sleep disorders medicine, examined Applicant and diagnosed him as suffering from 
delayed-sleep phase syndrome (Tr. 94-98, 172; AE E, F).2 Applicant has had this 
medical problem for many years, and it contributed to his excessive daytime sleepiness 
(Tr. 98). Applicant had great difficulty falling asleep at night and then he would 
oversleep the next morning (Tr. 98-99). M thoroughly described the testing process and 
methods, including drug therapy and sleeping/light strategies, to reduce the impact of 
the symptoms of delayed-sleep phase syndrome (Tr. 99-121; AE D, G, I, J). Applicant is 
 
2 I accepted a stipulation that Applicant suffers from this disorder (Tr. 173-174). 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
now able to get to work around 11:00 am, and then he works for the next eight hours 
(Tr. 160). He has never submitted false time cards at his current employment (Tr. 160).  
 
Allegation of providing false information to an investigator (SOR ¶ 1.b)  
 
On May 7, 2007, R made a JPAS entry indicating that on April 19, 2007, 
Applicant admitted falsifying his time cards to O (Tr. 215; GE 4). On February 21, 2008, 
an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Issue Resolution (IR) Investigator received 
a tasking from her office to interview Applicant (Tr. 39, 47-48). The purpose of her 
interview was to determine the reason Applicant left his employment with R (Tr. 39). 
She believed that she asked Applicant why he was terminated from his employment 
with R (Tr. 47-48).3 She did not know the actual reason he was terminated from his 
employment with R (Tr. 48). The OPM IR investigator interviewed Applicant for about 30 
minutes (Tr. 27-53; SOR ¶ 1.b; GE 2, 10). During her interview, the OPM IR investigator 
took notes and then used the notes to generate a summary of the interview (Tr. 42).4 
The notes were destroyed 90 days after the interview (Tr. 42). The OPM IR investigator 
prepared and transmitted her report the next day (Tr. 32). Applicant told the OPM IR 
investigator that he left his employment with the defense contractor on good terms 
(SOR ¶ 1.b; GE 10). The OPM IR investigator only had a vague recollection of the 
interview because it was about 18 months previously, and she conducts 30 interviews 
per month (Tr. 29).   
 
Applicant objected to the OPM IR investigator’s authentication of her report 
because she could not recall the interview or preparing her report. I overruled the 
objection because she recognized a code she used to submit the report (which required 
her password). More importantly, in his response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
reviewed and adopted the OPM IR investigator’s summary of interview. This adoption is 
admissible because it constitutes a party admission. See Generally Federal Rule of 
Evidence 801(d)(2)(B) (stating, “a statement of which the party has manifested an 
adoption or belief in its truth”). Applicant provided written corrections concerning dates, 
spellings of names, and some other facts in the summary of his interview (GE 2). 
Applicant concluded, aside from his corrections, “all other information is correct” (GE 
 
3 She did not have a copy of her tasking, and could not specifically remember what it said. She 
assumed the contents of the tasking from her interview summary (Tr. 50). The interview summary begins, 
“Subject was interviewed in person on February 21, 2008, to discuss termination of employment” (GE 2). 
The material information from the summary is that she asked Applicant why he left employment from R, 
and he did not tell her anything about committing time-card fraud and he failed to explain that he resigned 
after being threatened with termination. 
 
4 The OPM IR investigator erroneously stated her handwritten notes were “word-for-word” as 
opposed to a summary; however, she does not take shorthand and did not provide any other convincing 
information to support her claim of being able to make such comprehensive notes of her interview (Tr. 43, 
48). The OPM IR investigator also said Applicant “swore that he was telling the truth” (Tr. 43). She also 
said she starts the interview by advising the interviewee that the statement is an “unsworn declaration,” 
the importance that the interview be truthful, and about the applicability of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 (Tr. 44, 52-
53). The summary of interview indicates it is an “unsworn declaration” (GE 2). Later, she corrected her 
statement at the hearing to indicate it was an unsworn interview (Tr. 45).    
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
2).5 I accepted all of Applicant’s corrections as information he provided to the 
investigator.  
  
Applicant claimed that he did not willfully provide false information to the OPM IR 
investigator (Tr. 176). He said he thought he left on good terms because his task 
leaders were happy with his work, and the true reason for his departure would remain 
confidential (Tr. 176, 179). In his August 1, 2008, response to DOHA interrogatories, he 
included O’s name as his supervisor for administrative purposes and cited other 
employees as his day-to-day supervisors (Tr. 177; GE 2).    
 
Allegation of providing false information on his SF-86 (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
 
On September 30, 2008, Applicant completed an SF-86, which includes the 
following question:  
 
Question 22. Your Employment Record Has any of the following 
happened to you in the last 7 years? 
 
1. Fired from a job. 
 
2. Quit a job after being told you’d be fired. 
 
3. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct.  
 
4. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances.  
 
Applicant answered, “No.” At his hearing, he denied that he willfully provided 
false information in response to question 22 (Tr. 179-180). He said he thought he left R 
on good terms, and R would record his departure as a resignation (Tr. 180). He thought 
R would not inform the government about why he left employment with R (Tr. 203). It 
was Applicant’s intention to inform the government that he left employment with R on 
good terms (Tr. 204).   
 
Allegation of providing false information to an investigator (SOR ¶ 1.d)  
 
On November 17, 2008, a DoD investigator interviewed Applicant for about an 
hour (SOR ¶ 1.d; Tr. 60-72, 74; GE 6).6 The interview summary encompassed seven 
 
5 In ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 25, 2009) the Appeal Board discussed the 
right to confront witnesses under the Directive in connection with police investigative reports. See also 
ISCR Case No. 07-14939 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 2009) (citing authentication of Applicant’s interview 
using a DOHA interrogatory); ISCR Case No. 07-10804 at 3 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008) (same). 
 
6The investigator made notes during Applicant’s interview and then generated a summary of 
interview 24 to 48 hours later (Tr. 66-67). She did not have any independent recollection of the content of 
the interview and relied on her standard interview practices (Tr. 67-69). Applicant objected to admissibility 
of the interview (Tr. 66-72). I overruled the objection (Tr. 72). The interviewer’s lack of recollection of the 
specific interview goes to the weight given the summary and not its admissibility. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
typed pages (Tr. 76; GE 6). She did not focus the interview on why Applicant left his 
previous employment (Tr. 71). She asked standard questions about leaving 
employment (Tr. 71). Applicant told the investigator that he resigned under favorable 
conditions from employment with the defense contractor; he is eligible for rehire; and his 
resignation was for personal reasons relating to his desire to relocate to the same 
location where his girlfriend resides (SOR ¶ 1.d). He did not disclose that he resigned 
after admitting mischarging hours on his timecard (SOR ¶ 1.d).     
   
On November 18, 2008, Applicant telephoned the investigator (J), who 
interviewed him the previous day (Tr. 77, 184, 212; GE 7). Applicant told J that a 
security guard employed by contractor N informed Applicant that he left R’s employment 
under unfavorable conditions (Tr. 79).7 Applicant disclosed that O,8 one of his 
supervisors at R, gave him the option of voluntary resignation or the R would terminate 
him because Applicant made a mistake on his timecard, which O considered fraud (Tr. 
79).9 R’s employment record would reflect his voluntary resignation, and the reasons for 
his termination would be kept confidential and private (Tr. 79). Applicant said it was his 
understanding that he was not required to disclose the reasons for his termination (Tr. 
80). He called the investigator because he felt it was his duty to disclose all of the 
relevant information once he realized R had provided the unfavorable circumstances 
surrounding his resignation (Tr. 188).     
 
On December 30, 2008, J conducted a follow-up interview of Applicant (Tr. 81-
87; GE 7). Applicant disclosed his sleeping disorder, and that he was placed on a 
performance plan because of his tardiness (Tr. 86-87). Applicant admitted he 
“inaccurately reported the hours he worked” on his time card at R, and then he agreed 
with J that it was time-card fraud (Tr. 82-85; GE 7). 
 
Character recommendations and performance evaluations 
 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor (S) at N since October 2007 does not evaluate 
Applicant’s work performance (Tr. 125, 126,139). Applicant and S occasionally socialize 
outside the workplace (Tr. 135, 136). They work very closely together on information 
technology problems, services, and support (Tr. 126-127). Applicant has an unusual 
work schedule, as a work-place accommodation because of his sleep disorder (Tr. 128-
129). He is allowed to arrive late for work and to work late (Tr. 128-131). Applicant said 
 
7 On November 18, 2008, Applicant received the SOR from his security officer at N (Tr. 183, 212-
213). Applicant immediately called the investigator to correct his statement at his interview (Tr. 184). 
 
8 When Applicant applied for employment with N, he provided as references the names of several 
former supervisors at R that were aware of his technical expertise and that were all satisfied with his work 
(Tr. 210-211, 218). However, he did not provide O’s name (Tr. 159). O was in charge of time cards, leave, 
and other administrative matters at R (Tr. 210-211). The first time Applicant disclosed that O was one of 
his supervisors at R was after he received the SOR (Tr. 192). He did not believe the other points of 
contact he provided at R were aware of the reasons (time-card fraud and the threat to initiate termination) 
that he left employment at R (Tr. 190-192).   
   
9 Applicant agreed with the accuracy of the summary of interview, except he said he falsified the 
time cards as opposed to merely making a mistake on his time cards (Tr. 187). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
he left employment with R because he had problems with his time card; however, he 
also said he left on good terms when he resigned from R (Tr. 133). Applicant told S that 
he thought the time-card related reasons he left employment with R were to remain 
confidential (Tr. 134). Applicant is a trustworthy, top-notch professional (Tr. 130, 135). 
Applicant is a great employee and team player (Tr. 136).  
 
Applicant’s performance evaluation at N for 2007 to 2008 notes he has had 
difficulty with arriving to work on time (Tr. 162; AE N). His performance evaluation at N 
for 2008 to 2009 has all favorable comments and does not cite a problem with tardiness 
(Tr. 163-164; AE O). Applicant worked with great diligence and dedication, sometimes 
around the clock, to support customers (Tr. 165). He received a $2,000 award from N 
for meeting a particularly difficult deadline (Tr. 167-168; AE K). He also received pay 
increases (Tr. 168-169; AE L, M). He informed his supervisors at N about why he left 
employment at R (Tr. 170).    
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline E (personal conduct) 
with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Personal Conduct (Guideline E) 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  .  .  .   (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations. 
 
Applicant’s employer, R, placed him on a PIP because of his tardiness. Applicant 
suffered from delayed-sleep phase syndrome, which often caused him to oversleep and 
to be late for work. From November 2006 to April 2007, Applicant submitted false time 
cards to R to conceal his tardiness. His submissions constituted fraud, as he claimed 
and was paid for more hours than he actually worked. O, his supervisor at R, confronted 
Applicant with the evidence of his fraudulent activity, and offered to let Applicant resign 
in lieu of termination. Applicant accepted this offer. His multiple submissions of false 
time cards establish AG ¶ 16(d)(3). 
 
On February 21, 2008, and November 17, 2008, Applicant told government 
investigators conducting security-related investigations that he left employment with R 
on positive or favorable terms. He did not disclose the true reasons he left employment 
with R. On September 30, 2008, Applicant answered, “No” to the questions on his SF-
86 about whether he “[q]uit a job after being told [he would] be fired,” and “[l]eft a job by 
mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct.” He intentionally provided false 
information to security investigators and on his SF-86. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both 
apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant made statements on 
February 21, 2008, and November 17, 2008, to government investigators conducting 
security-related investigations, and on September 30, 2008, he signed his SF-86. He 
admitted he told the investigators he left employment with R on good terms, and he did 
not disclose to the investigators and on his SF-86 that he resigned in lieu of termination 
for time-card fraud. He said he did not provide the true reasons for leaving employment 
with R because O told him the time-card fraud would be kept confidential.10 I found his 
statement at the hearing about his reasons for providing false information to be credible. 
He honestly thought R would keep his misconduct confidential. However, immediately 
upon receipt of the SOR, he realized R had not kept the time-card fraud information 
 
10The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). “When an applicant claims that a false answer to a [SF-86] question is not deliberate, the Judge 
should address explicitly any contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case No. 08-07998 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 12, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 07-03307 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2008)). 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
confidential. After he received the SOR, he called an investigator and truthfully 
disclosed the real reasons for leaving employment with R.   
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) all partially apply. Applicant suffers from delayed-
sleep phase syndrome, and being extremely tired affected his judgment. His medical 
problem provides some important extenuation. He has recently received medical 
treatment for delayed-sleep phase syndrome. He is now able to better accommodate 
his lifestyle and employment to address his medical problem. He understands the 
importance of honesty and integrity in his government-related employment. He has 
acknowledged the misconduct and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior. His disclosure of his 
misconduct, and medical assistance for delayed-sleep phase syndrome are important 
“positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, [and] 
duress.”  
 
In conclusion, however, Applicant’s conduct cannot be fully mitigated under 
Guideline E because the fraudulent activity to conceal his tardiness and subsequent 
falsification to conceal his time-card misconduct continue to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. His most recent falsification was on November 17, 
2008, and it is simply too serious to mitigate at this time. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The whole person factors supporting reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
significant; however, they are insufficient to warrant approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance at this time. Applicant graduated from one of the top United States technical 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
universities. His supervisors noted Applicant’s excellent performance. He received 
financial awards and substantial pay raises from his current employer. He admitted his 
time-card fraud, and that he failed to provide information about resigning in lieu of 
termination to investigators and on his SF-86. He has delayed-sleep phase syndrome, 
which affected his employment at R. Being exceptionally tired affected his judgment, 
and I do not believe he would make such poor decisions now that he has identified his 
medical problem and is receiving treatment. He is now able to better accommodate his 
lifestyle and employment to address his medical problem. Now that the government is 
well-aware of his time-card fraud, and subsequent falsifications, his motive to conceal 
these particular acts of misconduct and vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation and 
duress have been eliminated. Applicant is an intelligent, capable, reliable, dedicated, 
and trustworthy employee.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant submitted false time cards from November 2006 to April 2007. He was paid 
for hours he did not work. There is no evidence he reimbursed his employer. He 
resigned in lieu of termination and received a promise of confidentiality. He provided 
false information to two investigators conducting security-related investigations, and he 
falsified his SF-86. The promise of confidentiality facilitated his scheme to conceal his 
misconduct. His misconduct cannot be mitigated at this time. The falsifications were 
knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. He was sufficiently mature to be fully 
responsible for his conduct. Falsification of a security clearance application shows a 
lack of trustworthiness and poor judgment. Such conduct goes to the heart of the 
clearance process, and a security clearance is not warranted at this time.     
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors,”11 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
11See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
