KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The record provides no reason to doubt that Applicant’s decision to represent himself
was knowing and intelligent.  Having chosen to represent himself, Applicant cannot complain
about the quality of his self-representation.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-09808.a1
DATE: 09/21/2009
DATE: September 21, 2009
In Re:
----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-09808
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 27, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 22, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his application
of the pertinent mitigating conditions; whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous;
and whether the Judge denied Applicant due process of law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a system administrator
for a defense contractor.  He has received a two-year degree from a technical institute.  In the early
2000s, he had substantial debt, resulting from student loans and from credit card use.  Applicant filed
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection and was discharged in bankruptcy in September 2004.  
In August 2004, Applicant engaged in an “oral partnership” with another person for the
purchase of residential property.  Decision at 2.  The partner would take care of repairs and cover
the monthly loan payments, while Applicant would secure financing.  Applicant paid nothing down
for the property, the purchase of which was covered by two separate loans–one, a second mortgage,
in the amount of $55,000 and the other, a conventional first mortgage, in the amount of
$220,000–from the same lender.  The Judge observed, “Just how Applicant was able to finance the
purchase of his investment property for nothing down and little track history, and during a pending
bankruptcy, is unclear.”  Id. at 3.  Applicant’s partner ceased making payments on the investment
property, and, from November 2004 until October 2006, neither Applicant nor his partner made any
payments.  
In 2005, the lender sold the two loans to two separate entities.  The holder of the $55,000
note charged it off, while the holder of the other sought to sell the property off at a public auction.
Apparently unsuccessful in finding a buyer at the foreclosure sale, the holder of the $220,000 note,
according to Applicant, “either retained title . . . or resold it to a third party.”  Id. at 4.   The Judge
commented that the record evidence is not sufficient to resolve the question of who owns this
property.  Applicant has been working with a credit building firm to resolve his disputes with the
creditors in question.  He nets over $1,100 a month after he pays his expenses.  
Applicant contends that he was denied due process of law, insofar as he acted pro se.  He
contends that the Judge should have sua sponte held the record open for him to provide additional
evidence, for example, documentation concerning the loan in question.  He implies that, had he been
represented by an attorney at the hearing, he would have requested an opportunity to present
additional documents, which could have answered questions lingering after the close of the record.
An examination of the record demonstrates that Applicant was notified of the rights afforded him
by the Directive, including his right to employ counsel, both prior to the hearing and at the beginning
“Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, among which is the1
expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is
required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust
concerns are explicit in financial cases (as here) and bring into play security concerns covered by the financial
considerations guideline.”  Decision at 7.
  
Applicant argues on appeal that, prior to the hearing, he had no idea that the state’s anti-deficiency law could2
be at issue.  However, the record demonstrates that it was Applicant himself who introduced the question of his debts’
enforceability.  In response to a question about a possible deficiency judgement against him, Applicant replied that
lenders generally do not pursue such avenues of recovery.  Tr. at 89.  The Judge’s comments about the absence of
corroboration for Applicant’s opinion are reasonable, in light of the fact that Applicant bore the burden of persuasion
as to mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.
Cf. ISCR Case No. 06-14521at 3 (Ap. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007).3
3
of it.  Applicant has some post-high school education and appears from the transcript to be articulate
and able to understand the allegations against him.  The record provides no reason to doubt that
Applicant’s decision to represent himself was knowing and intelligent.  Having chosen to represent
himself, Applicant cannot complain about the quality of his self-representation.  See  ISCR Case No.
08-03110 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 2009); ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004).
Furthermore, Applicant has not demonstrated that any documents that he, with the advantage of
hindsight, might have submitted at the hearing would likely have produced a different result.  
In the analysis portion of his decision, the Judge stated that the evidence was not sufficient
to resolve the issue of whether state law would operate to Applicant’s benefit by relieving him of
liability for a possible deficiency judgement.  He also noted that Applicant had not provided
performance evaluations from his job, letters of support from supervisors, etc.  However, the Judge’s
decision relied in large measure upon Applicant’s having entered into a facially risky real estate
purchase while undergoing bankruptcy, thereby evidencing a lack of trustworthiness and reliability.1
Despite the Judge’s comments about various types of documentation which could have been
submitted, there is little reason to believe that such evidence would have supported the grant of a
clearance under the facts of this case.   Reliance upon the extent to which a debt may be legally2
unenforceable is generally not sufficient to demonstrate a reasonable response to debts or a good
faith effort to pay them.   While a Judge has the authority to hold a record open for the submission3
of other evidence, he has no positive obligation to do so, especially when, as here, Applicant does
not request it.    
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly consistent with the national
4
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance” is sustainable on this record.  Decision
at 8.  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”).
 Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael D. Hipple             
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                 
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                    
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
