                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-04776 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on September 
27, 2004. On December 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the government’s security concerns 
under Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and it recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 16, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. DOHA received Applicant’s answer to SOR on February 
18, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 20, 2009. The case 
was assigned to another administrative judge on April 2, 2009, and was reassigned to 
me on May 11, 2009, due to caseload considerations. Counsel for Applicant entered his 
notice of appearance on April 9, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 23, 
2009, scheduling the case for May 19, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through U, which were 
received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2009.  
 
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice (Exhibit (Ex.) 
I(A)), requesting that I take administrative notice of the summary of facts contained in 
Ex. I(A) as well as those facts in Exs. I through VIII. Without objection from Applicant, I 
took administrative notice of the documents offered by Department Counsel, which 
pertained to Hong Kong and the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Tr. 14-15.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Hong Kong and the PRC were derived from Exs. I(A), and I through VIII as contained 
infra under the subheading “Hong Kong and the PRC” in this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a., 1.d., 1.f., 1.g., and 1.h. with explanations. He denied ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., and 1.e. with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact.   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 Applicant is a 26-year-old assistant engineer who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since August 2004. Tr. 42, GE 1. He successfully held an interim 
secret clearance from December 2004 to December 2008, which was revoked as a 
result of these proceedings. He seeks to reinstate his security clearance, which would 
allow him to work on additional assignments within his company. Tr. 43, 87. 
 
Applicant was born in the U.S. in December 1982, and is a U.S. citizen by birth. 
He graduated from a U.S. high school in June 2000. He attended a prestigious 
university in the U.S., and was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer 
Science in May 2004. Applicant is currently attending graduate school part-time and 
pursuing a Master of Science Degree in Systems Engineering, with an anticipated 
graduation date of 2010. He estimates that he has completed 12 credit hours. Tr. 19-20, 
GE 1. Applicant maintains a valid U.S. passport, which is the only passport he has ever 
held. Tr. 41, 51. 
 
Applicant met his wife while attending college, and married her in the U.S. in July 
2007. His wife was born,1 raised and educated in the U.S. Applicant’s wife is employed 
as a marketing coordinator for a major book publishing company. Tr. 18, 41, 74. 
 
Applicant has four immediate family members, excluding his spouse. Their 
relationship to Applicant/brief description follows: 
 
Mother. She was born in June 1957 in Hong Kong, and is now 52. She became a 
U.S. naturalized citizen in September 2003. She does not hold citizenship with any 
other country other than the U.S. GE 1. Applicant’s mother was awarded a Bachelor of 
Science in Applied Arts and Sciences, Business Administration (Accounting), from a 
U.S. university in August 1981. During her early working life, she worked as an 
accountant. She now works with Applicant’s father in the missionary field in Hong Kong, 
discussed infra. Tr. 52, 65. AE O. 
 
Father. He was born in July 1956 in Hong Kong, and is now 53. He became a 
U.S. naturalized citizen in September 2003. He does not hold citizenship with any other 
country other than the U.S. Tr. 63-64, GE 1. Applicant’s father received all of his higher 
education in the U.S. to include a Bachelor of Science degree (summa cum laude) in 
June 1977, a Master of Science degree in Engineering in June 1978, the Degree of 
Engineer in December 1980, and a Ph.D. in Engineering in December 1981. Later, he 
attended a seminary and was awarded a Master of Arts in Missiology in December 
1988. Tr. 53-55, AE P-T.  
 
Upon completion of his education, Applicant’s father worked in the engineering 
field in which he held positions in the U.S. and Canada. In 1992, he left engineering and 
entered the missionary field working for a U.S. based Christian organization. Tr. 55, 57-
58. In 2002, Applicant’s father was assigned to a missionary post in Singapore, and in 
2004, he was assigned to a missionary post in Hong Kong, where he remains today. 
                                                          
1 As such, she is a U.S. citizen by birth. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
(SOR ¶ 1.a.) Applicant’s parents regularly return to the U.S. for visits, typically every six 
months. Tr. 55, 58-59, 85-86.  
 
Applicant’s father holds the job title of Field Director in Hong Kong and is 
responsible for overseeing other missionaries in the field. He directs missionaries in 
their field work and ensures their families are adjusting to and settling in their new 
environments. His travels take him to countries in the Far East to include mainland 
China, Singapore, and Thailand. Tr. 61-63, 83-85. 
 
Applicant’s parents work for and derive their salaries from a U.S. based Christian 
Order, a 501(C)(4) organization. The Christian Order is a non-profit organization and is 
registered in Hong Kong and with the State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs of 
the PRC. As such, their work is recognized by the local Chinese government. Applicant 
is not aware of his parents ever being harassed by the authorities while posted in Hong 
Kong. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) Response to SOR, Tr. 11, 37, 39, 64-65, 75-76.  
 
Applicant’s father is pending reassignment in 2010. He anticipates retiring and 
returning to the U.S. Tr. 59, 85-86. Applicant’s parents own a home in the U.S. Brother 
(1), discussed infra, currently lives in that home while his parents are abroad. Tr. 37. 
 
Brother (1). He was born in February 1984 in the U.S., and is now 25. He is a 
U.S. citizen by birth. He lives in the U.S., and is employed as a web developer for a 
major television network. Applicant communicates with him typically by e-mail “every 
two to three months.” GE 1, Tr. 38, 79. 
 
Brother (2). He was born in August 1990 in Canada, and is now 19. He became a 
U.S. naturalized citizen in September 2003. GE 1. Brother (2) recently began college in 
the U.S. (class of 2012) and resides with his parents in Hong Kong during summer 
break. Brother (2) was a minor when he accompanied his parents to Hong Kong and 
attended international schools while there. He has never participated in his parents’ 
work. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e.) Response to SOR. Applicant communicates with him by a 
combination of e-mail or telephone “every one to two months.” Tr. 38, 49-50, 81-82. 
  
Applicant communicates with his parents typically by telephone “every two to 
three months.” (SOR ¶ 1.f.) Response to SOR, Tr. 48, 68. His parents visit him and his 
brothers during their periodic visits to the U.S. Tr. 56. Applicant does not provide any 
support to his parents. He does not have any future plans to visit them in Hong Kong. 
Tr. 41, 88. 
 
Applicant’s travel to Hong Kong has been limited. He went there in 1999, and 
more recently for two weeks in December 2006 and January 2007. During his visit to 
Hong Kong, he visited the PRC for several days. His most recent trip consisted of 
sightseeing with his family in various locations in Southeastern PRC, and spending the 
holidays with his family and then fiancée. Response to SOR. (SOR ¶ 1.h.) Applicant 
informed and discussed this trip with his Facility Security Officer. Tr. 48, 70, 73-74. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Applicant stated he is sensitive and discreet about his parents’ religious activities 
in the PRC. He believes all work by foreigners is sensitive in the PRC. This, he believes, 
even applies to non-profit organizations whose work is recognized and supported by the 
local government. It is also his belief that his parents need to be sensitive in all aspects 
of their work in order to avoid any misunderstandings with the Chinese authorities. GE 
2, Response to SOR, Tr. 40, 70-71. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) Applicant does not feel that he is 
subject to any type of threat or coercion as a result of his parents’ work. He added that if 
such a threat or coercion ever surfaced, he would report it to his Facility Security Office. 
Tr. 40-41. 
 
Applicant’s paternal aunt and uncle are residents and citizens of Hong Kong. 
Applicant last saw his paternal uncle while vacationing in Hong Kong when visiting his 
parents during December 2006 through January 2007. His paternal uncle also attended 
his wedding in July 2007 in the U.S. Applicant has not seen his paternal aunt in the last 
seven years. He communicated with both his paternal aunt and uncle around the time of 
his wedding regarding their attendance at his wedding. Applicant believes his uncle 
works for a privately owned shipping company and his aunt is a housewife. Tr. 47-48, 
81-82. Response to SOR. (SOR ¶ 1.g.) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are U.S. born citizens and live in the 
U.S. His father-in-law is an electrical engineer and his mother-in-law is a housewife and 
church secretary. His father-in-law served in the Army Reserve as an engineer. His 
brother-in-law and sister-in-law live at home with his in-laws. Applicant maintains 
frequent contact with his in-laws and enjoys a good relationship with them. Tr. 46-47. 
 
Religion and church attendance was a significant component in Applicant’s 
upbringing and remains so today. Tr. 55-56. He regularly volunteers for church-
sponsored events. Applicant made presentations at job fairs on the use of Excel and 
Word, and critiqued resumes for job seekers. He organized social events for younger 
members and outings with the Habitat for Humanity. He has also worked with 
community-related programs to include the local food bank and homeless shelter. He 
also enjoys watching television. Tr. 72-73. 
 
Applicant’s pastor testified on his behalf. He has known Applicant’s parents for 
25 years and officiated at Applicant’s wedding in July 2007. The pastor sees Applicant 
on a weekly basis since his wedding and has socialized with the Applicant and his wife. 
He holds the opinion that Applicant is honest and trustworthy. The pastor also holds a 
very high opinion of Applicant’s father and believes him to be a very trustworthy and 
honorable person. The pastor is familiar with the work Applicant’s father performs in 
Hong Kong and the PRC. Tr. 21-35. 
   
 All of Applicant’s assets are in the U.S. He pays U.S. and state taxes. His annual 
salary is $78,000. He has $150,000 in savings accounts, and $140,000 invested in his 
401(k) account, for a combined total of $290,000. His automobiles are paid for. Tr. 41-
45. Applicant stated his loyalty lies with the U.S. He would be loyal to the U.S. should it 
ever engage in an armed conflict with another country. He has registered for the 
selective service, as required. Applicant fully supports the U.S. Constitution and 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
missions of the Department of Defense whether those missions are offensive or 
defensive in nature. He knows of nothing that he could be coerced or pressured about, 
and he responded that should any such situation arise, “national security trumps over 
any embarrassment I might suffer.” GE 2. 
 
 Applicant submitted ten reference letters. The authors of these letters cover a 
wide spectrum of individuals to include a former supervisor, an active duty Air Force 
intelligence officer (in-law), pastor, father’s church friends, senior company managers, 
and college friend. The consistent and overriding sense these letters convey is that 
Applicant is a trustworthy, loyal, hardworking, and honorable person.  
 
The senior company managers spoke of the significant contribution Applicant has 
made to the national defense and of his potential for future service. They also noted that 
Applicant successfully held an interim clearance for four years without incident. They 
collectively support reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. AE A-K. Applicant 
submitted three years (2005-2007) of employee evaluations that document above 
average performance and further substantiate the positive comments contained in 
senior management letters. AE K-N. 
  
Hong Kong and the PRC2 
 
Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region of the PRC on July 1, 1997. 
Hong Kong has a population of 6.9 million and 95% of Hong Kong’s population is of 
Chinese descent. China has given Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy, except the 
PRC has retained responsibility for defense and foreign policy. Recently, China has 
taken a more active oversight role of Hong Kong’s control of political developments. 
 
The Hong Kong government generally respects the human rights of its citizens; 
however, reported human rights problems include some political restrictions on the 
legislature’s power, press self-censorship, violence and discrimination against women, 
and restrictions on workers’ rights to organize and bargain collectively. 
 
The PRC’s Military Intelligence Department, First Bureau, is responsible for 
collecting military information about the U.S. The PRC’s Ministry of State Security is the 
“preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China,” and maintains intelligence 
operations in Hong Kong, and Macau, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals with 
Hong Kong or Macau connections. 
 
China has an authoritarian, Communist government. China has a poor human 
rights record, suppresses political dissent, and practices arbitrary arrest and detention, 
forced confessions, torture, and other prisoner mistreatment. 
 
China is a nuclear power with a large Army. China is geographically vast, and 
has a population of over one billion people. It has significant resources, and an 
 
2The contents of this section are taken in whole or in part from Exs. I(A), I-VIII. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
economy that in recent years has expanded about 10% per year. China aggressively 
competes with the United States in many areas. PRC’s competitive relationship with the 
United States exacerbates the risk posed by Applicant’s Hong Kong connections.   
 
 China actively collects military, economic, and proprietary industrial information 
about the United States because of the following circumstances: (1) its position as a 
global superpower; (2) its military, political, and economic investments in the Pacific Rim 
and Asia; (3) its leading role in development of advanced technology that China desires 
for economic growth; and (4) China considers the large number of Americans of 
Chinese ancestry as intelligence targets. China’s active intelligence gathering programs 
focus on sensitive and protected U.S. technologies.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent 
contact with his parents and to a lesser extent with his younger brother when he is in 
Hong Kong during summer breaks. These close relationships create a potential risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion meriting a close 
examination of all circumstances. 
 
 The government produced substantial evidence of these two disqualifying 
conditions as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
government established that Applicant’s parents currently are residents of Hong Kong, 
and that Applicant maintains frequent contact with them by e-mail and travel. The 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
 
 Two foreign influence mitigating conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applying common sense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, and/or obligation to, his immediate family. ISCR 
Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant demonstrated the indicia of ties of affection for/and or 
obligation to his parents and brother by telephone and e-mail contact as well as his 
travel to Hong Kong and the PRC in December 2006 to January 2007.  
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Applicant’s parents are currently working for a non-profit Christian organization 
registered in Hong Kong and with the State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs of 
the PRC. As such, their work is recognized by the local Chinese government. 
Applicant’s younger brother’s time in Hong Kong is limited to summer break when not 
attending college. Applicant’s parents have not had any conflicts with the local Chinese 
government since their arrival in Hong Kong in 2004. Applicant’s contact with his 
paternal aunt and uncle is very limited. Their presence in Hong Kong, which is now part 
of the PRC, and Applicant’s infrequent foreign travel, creates concerns under this 
Guideline. As such, the burden shifted to Applicant to show that the presence of his 
relatives in Hong Kong and his travel there do not create security risks.  
 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “Hong Kong and the PRC,” Hong Kong is a part of 
the PRC, which is ruled by a communist government that actively engages in 
intelligence gathering against the U.S. The PRC also has a poor human rights record. 
 
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the U.S. and any foreign 
country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. was not challenged in this 
proceeding. The issue is rather a positional one.  
 
[Guideline B] hinges not on what choice Applicant might make if he is 
forced to choose between his loyalty to his family and the United States, 
but rather hinges on the concept that Applicant should not be placed in a 
position where he is forced to make such a choice. ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005). 
 
On balance, Applicant has not met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
that [his relationship with his parents] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.” The nature of the PRC’s government and its ongoing intelligence 
gathering activities against the U.S. places Applicant in just this position, given his close 
relationship with his family and their continued presence and connection with Hong 
Kong and the PRC. Accordingly, mitigating condition 8(a) does not apply. However, 
Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships with and within the U.S. warrant 
application of mitigating condition 8(b). 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
  In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, 
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
circumstances.”3 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are 
used for “whole person” analysis.  
 
Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of 
participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of 
the nine APFs to this adjudication.4 In addition to the eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the 
clearance decision is “an overall common sense determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.    
 
  The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis to address “evidence of 
an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to 
the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
 
 I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal 
connections to Hong Kong. Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole 
person analysis. First, the PRC is a nuclear power and PRC’s government is a rival of 
the United States. The PRC is an authoritarian, Communist state. More importantly for 
security purposes, PRC actively seeks classified and industrial and economic 
information. The PRC may attempt to use Applicant’s parents and family members who 
live in Hong Kong to obtain such information. Also, Applicant visited his parents in Hong 
Kong from December 2006 to January 2007. Although Applicant has no immediate 
plans to visit Hong Kong, he did not rule out visiting Hong Kong in the future. Applicant 
also maintains frequent contact with his parents and his younger brother when on 
school break in Hong Kong. These contacts and visits are manifestations of the strong 
affection and regard Applicant has for family members in Hong Kong.   
  
 There is mitigating evidence that weighs towards granting Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant is a U.S. born citizen and the U.S. is the only country for whom he 
claims allegiance. He received his high school and college education in the U.S. Apart 
from brief times when his father was posted outside the U.S., he has lived in the U.S. 
He was married in the U.S., and Brother (1) lives in the U.S. and Brother (2) lives in the 
U.S. attending college the majority of the year. His assets in the U.S. are substantial in 
contrast to having no assets in Hong Kong. He is a U.S. citizen and U.S. passport 
3 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
holder. His wife is a U.S. citizen and his in-laws are U.S. citizens. His parents are U.S. 
citizens and his two brothers are U.S. citizens. His parents own a home in the U.S., to 
which they intend to return upon completion of their missionary work in Hong Kong. 
 
Applicant’s ties to the United States are stronger than his ties to his parents and 
limited extended family in Hong Kong. There is no evidence Applicant has ever taken 
any action which could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to 
the United States very seriously, and he has worked diligently for a defense contractor 
since August 2004. Notably, Applicant successfully held an interim secret security 
clearance for four years. He also has the overwhelming support of senior company 
management. His character evidence and demeanor strongly support the notion he is a 
very trustworthy and honest person. The evidence contains no derogatory record 
evidence about the Applicant. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Hong Kong. Hong Kong is no 
longer a British colony. Hong Kong remains a free and open society where human rights 
are generally respected. It has some autonomy, but remains connected to the PRC. The 
PRC has an authoritarian government, a less than stellar human rights record, and has 
a very aggressive espionage program. The PRC conducts intelligence operations in 
Hong Kong. 
 
 I conclude that in the unlikely event that Applicant’s family in Hong Kong would 
be subject to coercion or duress from the Hong Kong government in an attempt to 
obtain sensitive information, Applicant because of his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the United States. 
  
This case must be adjudged on his own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
under the facts presented that the Hong Kong government or its agents might exploit or 
attempt to exploit Applicant’s family members in such a way that this U.S. citizen would 
have to choose between his pledged loyalty to the U.S. and his family members. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and all the facts and circumstances 
in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns pertaining to foreign influence.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
                  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.h.: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
