1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-09916
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 18, 2009
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF86), on
October 22, 2007 (Item 3). On March 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued to the Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by President Bush on December
29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
 Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on March 27, 2009, and requested a
decision without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material
(FORM) to the Applicant on May 4, 2009. The Applicant received the FORM on July 4,
2009, and was given 30 days to submit any additional information. He submitted
additional information on July 22, 2009. The Department Counsel had no objection to
2
this material and it is admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibit A. The case was
assigned to me on July 31, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 30 and married.  He is employed by a defense contractor and
seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government alleges that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he
is financially overextended and therefore at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  The Applicant denied subparagraphs 1.a., 1.c., and 1.j. The Applicant
admitted all of the remaining allegations under this paragraph.  Those admissions are
hereby deemed findings of fact.  
1.a.  The Applicant denies that he is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $131 since 2006. Credit reports dated March 18, 2008 (Item 7 at 6), and
February 12, 2009 (Item 6 at 1), support the existence of this debt. There is evidence
that the Applicant disputed this debt to the credit reporting agencies, but he did not
submit the result of this dispute. (Item 5 at 6.) Based on all of the available evidence, I
find that this debt has not been paid.
1.b.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a credit union in the amount of
$8,510 for a vehicle repossession. (Item 5 at 7; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 12.) This debt has
not been paid.
1.c.  The Applicant denies that he is indebted to a department store in the
amount  of $3,539. Credit reports dated March 18, 2008 (Item 7 at 14), and February
12, 2009 (Item 6 at 2), support the existence of this debt. The Applicant submitted no
information in support of his denial. Based on all of the available evidence, I find that
this debt has not been paid.
1.d.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a loan company in the amount of
$2,042.  (Item 5 at 7; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 8.) This debt has not been paid.
1.e.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to another loan company in the
amount of $3,396. (Item 5 at 7; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 10.) This debt has not been paid.
1.f.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a third loan company in the past
due amount of at least $627 as of February 12, 2009.  (Item 5 at 6; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at
5.) This debt has not been paid.
3
1.g.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a bank in the past due amount of
at least $233 as of February 12, 2009.  (Item 5 at 6; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 5.) This debt
has not been paid.
1.h.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $6,689. (Item 7 at 6.) This debt has not been paid.
1.i.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a bank in the past due amount of
at least $28.  (Item 5 at 6; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 7.) This debt has not been paid.
1.j.  The Applicant denies that he is indebted to a credit union in the amount of
$10,746 for a past due automobile loan. The Applicant provided a copy of the title to the
automobile, showing that the credit union released their lien in October 2007.
(Applicant’s Exhibit A at 3.) Based on all of the available evidence, I find that the
Applicant has paid this debt. This subparagraph is found for the Applicant.
1.k.  The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a fourth loan company in the
charged off amount of $5,673. (Item 5 at 7; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 10.) This debt has not
been paid.
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access
to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his own common sense,
as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in
making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise
security concerns. The Applicant, by his own admission, has approximately $30,000 in
past due debts, all of which have been due and owing for several years. The evidence
is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
5
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s
financial difficulties arose primarily after 2002.  He submitted evidence showing that he
paid off a substantial debt concerning his automobile, but has not submitted any
evidence showing that he has paid any of the other debts. The fact that the rest of the
debts have been due and owing for so long is troubling. This mitigating condition is not
applicable to this case. 
The Applicant submitted no evidence showing that AG ¶ 20(b) is applicable. That
condition states it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
The Applicant has not initiated a good-faith effort to pay off his creditors. There is
no track record of his making payments for a consistent period of time.  Accordingly, AG
¶ 20(d) is not applicable. Finally, given the fact that he is approximately $30,000.00 in
debt, I cannot find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or
is under control,” as required by AG ¶ 20(c).
Based on all of the available evidence, I cannot find that the Applicant has
mitigated the allegations under this Guideline.  Paragraph 1 is found against the
Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person
concept. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) in making such a decision: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The Applicant has a history of not
paying his debts.  As set forth above, I cannot find that there have been permanent
6
behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).  In addition, I find that there is the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶2(a)(8)), and that there is a likelihood of
recurrence (AG ¶2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude the
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations.  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
