 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of     ) 
     ) 
       ) ISCR Case No. 08-09562 
      ) 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance     ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guideline for financial considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
On December 17, 2007, Applicant submitted a security clearance 
application (Standard Form [SF] 86) to request a security clearance required as 
part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of 
the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative 
 
 
1  
 
 
2  
                                                     
finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance.  
 
 On March 12, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized 
on April 7, 2009, Applicant admitted all the allegations under Guideline F except 
1.h., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.m.3 He also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge.  
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 29, 2009 and the 
case was assigned to me on the following day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on May 5, 2009 and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 21, 2009. 
During the hearing, the government offered three exhibits, marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified, and offered nine exhibits, which were marked as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through I and admitted without objection. He did not present 
witnesses. I held the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. Applicant timely submitted four documents, which Department 
Counsel forwarded without objection. I admitted the documents as AE J through 
M. DOHA received the transcript on June 22, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, 
and the evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 38 years old, completed some college courses in 1992 but did 
not earn a degree. He is currently employed as a network engineer for a defense 
contractor. He married in 1993 and divorced in 2005. His three daughters, ages 
9, 11 and 15 years, and his son, age 13, live with their mother in another state 
(GE 1; Tr. 27-28, 100). 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations 
in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 Applicant's Answer included three documents that will be identified as follows: Answer 
Document (AD) 1: May 2008 letter from a creditor regarding deficiency balance on repossessed 
automobile (allegation 1.j.); AD 2: 1099-A form regarding mortgage (allegation 1.i.); AD 3: August 
2008 worksheet regarding Applicant's child support (allegation 1.m.).  
 
 
3  
                                                     
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife separated in approximately August 2004. He 
lived apart from them but paid the house payments and costs, and his family’s 
living expenses. Following their divorce in 2005, Applicant and his ex-wife were 
involved in lengthy legal proceedings until approximately August 2008. He paid 
alimony of $800 per month from 2005 to 2007, as well as child support and his 
wife’s attorney’s fees. Applicant's child support obligation has varied. In 2005, his 
obligation was $1,715 per month; in July 2007, it was $2,420 per month. He 
sought relief from the court as to the amount. In the Final Order of August 2008, 
the court ordered child support of $619 biweekly,4 or approximately $1,238 per 
month. Applicant testified that the divorce “financially ruined me.” He used credit 
cards and charge accounts to pay his expenses, legal fees and attorneys’ costs. 
The delinquencies on these accounts, alleged in the SOR, amount to more than 
$70,000. Applicant testified that he had sound credit before his divorce, and his 
credit bureau reports show that all the debts alleged in the SOR started 
becoming delinquent in 2007, during the legal battle (GE 1, 2, 3; AE B, D, F, G; 
Tr. 31, 74, 84-88). 
 
 Applicant was awarded the house as part of the divorce settlement, after 
paying his ex-wife her share of the home’s value. His credit bureau report of 
December 2007 shows that he had a first mortgage of $307,092 and a second 
mortgage of $182,300. Applicant decided to keep the house because the housing 
market was strong, and he hoped its value would increase. He could sell it at a 
significant profit, and use the proceeds to pay his debts. However, the real estate 
market deteriorated in 2006, and he was unable to sell. The mortgage company 
foreclosed, and the property was sold in December 2007. Applicant was issued a 
Form 1099-A, “Acquisition of Abandonment of Secured Property,” showing 
Applicant had an outstanding balance of $307,092, and the property had a fair 
market value of $571,226. Applicant submitted two trustee’s deeds showing the 
home sold on December 19, 2007 for $319,000, and was sold again on 
December 28, 2007 for $185,179. Applicant testified that these sales resulted in 
a total of about $500,000, which was more than the $487,000 he owed. 
Accordingly, he has no remaining deficiency on the mortgage loans. His 
December 2008 credit bureau report shows the foreclosure on the first mortgage, 
and charge-off of the second mortgage balance (AD 2; GE 2, 3; AE H; Tr. 34-38, 
84-88).  
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $92,800. After deductions, including $1,238 
per month child support, his net monthly take-home pay is approximately $2,920. 
He has been living with his parents since October 2007 to save money. He pays 
no rent, but does pay $300 per month to store his goods. In his personal financial 
statement (PFS) of December 2008, he listed monthly expenses, (excluding the 
child support that is included in his deductions) of $2,280. He testified that he 
included expenses that occur annually but not necessarily every month. He also 
4 Applicant received a credit of $619 per month to cover eight trips to visit his children in the state 
in which they now live (AE L). 
 
 
4  
listed a $950 travel expense to visit his children, which he testified is court-
ordered at once per month. He currently has a corporate credit card and is a co-
signer on a card with his parents. These accounts are current. Under his debts, 
he listed attorney’s fees of $700 per month, and his corporate credit card 
payment of $1,000 per month. At the hearing, he estimated a monthly net 
remainder, after expenses, of approximately $450 to $500. On his PFS, he did 
not list payments on any of the debts listed in the SOR. (GE 2; AE J; Tr. 67, 83, 
127)  
 
 Applicant has sought assistance from financial attorneys over the past two 
years. He was advised not to file a bankruptcy petition, but to seek relief in the 
form of lower child support payments. He is currently working with an attorney 
who advised him to attend a credit counseling course, which Applicant completed 
shortly before the hearing. Applicant admitted that he does not have a plan in 
place to deal with his debts (Tr. 90-101).  
 
 The status of Applicant's remaining debts follows.   
 
$ Charge accounts - $18,693 (allegations 1.a., 1.e., and 1.g.) 
Credit cards - $54,975 (allegations 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.f.); 
Line of credit - $2,277 (allegation 1.n.). Applicant used these 
accounts to pay his expenses during his separation, divorce and 
child custody proceedings. They became delinquent in 2007. 
Applicant has not contacted the creditors to establish payment 
plans and the accounts remain unresolved (GE 2, 3; Tr. 100). 
 
• Auto loan - $33,585 (allegation 1.j.). After Applicant voluntarily 
surrendered the car, the creditor sold it. He provided a May 
2008 letter from the creditor showing that he owes a deficiency 
balance of $14,700. Applicant admits that he owes this 
delinquent debt, and denies the amount listed in the SOR. He 
has not been in touch with the creditor since he received the 
2008 letter (AD 1; Tr. 38-40, 111-113). 
 
$   Citation - $200 (allegation 1.k.). Applicant was cited for failure to 
display current license tags, which he disputed. He provided 
evidence that he paid the fine on the day of the hearing (AE K; 
Tr. 134-137). 
 
$   Attorney fees - $7,000 (allegation 1.l.). Applicant owes his wife’s 
divorce attorney the alleged amount, as well as an additional 
$9,000, for a total of $16,000. He has been paying $500 per 
month, and provided evidence of payments made in 2008 and 
2009 (AE F, G, I, M; Tr. 137-140). 
 
$        Child support - $2,485 (allegation 1.m.). When Applicant and his 
wife separated, he paid child support directly to his wife. Later, 
 
 
5  
                                                     
as part of the divorce order, Applicant was required to pay the 
support through the state child support enforcement agency, and 
his pay was garnished. The date that the agency expected 
payment to be made did not fall on the dates that the child 
support was disbursed from Applicant's pay. Because of this 
discrepancy in dates, it appeared in most months that Applicant 
had not paid his child support and was in arrears. In fact, the 
correct child support payments were being automatically 
deducted from his pay every two weeks. I find that Applicant was 
not negligent in meeting his child support obligation (AE B, C, D, 
E, J; Tr. 42-59). 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-
sense determination based on examination of all available relevant and material 
information, and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in 
the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).5 Decisions must also reflect 
consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred 
to as the “whole person” concept. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does 
not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) at 
AG ¶ 18. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the 
preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. 
Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a 
heavy burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information 
5 Directive 6.3 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
 
6  
                                                     
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
each Applicant possesses the judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect 
the national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a 
concern as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is 
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). Applicant was unable to meet his financial 
obligations in 2007, and most of these debts remain unpaid, indicating a history 
of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant's indebtedness is not infrequent—the SOR cites 14 debts—nor 
did they occur in the distant past, as most of them remain unpaid. Applicant's 
failure to set in place any kind of payment plan for the majority of his SOR debts 
casts doubt on his good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 The circumstances that caused Applicant to become indebted were 
beyond his control. The record shows that Applicant’s delinquent debts started in 
2007, after his divorce, and stem largely from that unforeseen event. However, 
this mitigating condition also requires that an Applicant act responsibly when 
confronted with such situations. Here, Applicant has a substantial amount of debt 
that he has made little effort to resolve. Although he sought financial guidance, 
he did not use the attorneys’ expertise to help him set up a plan to pay the 
$70,000 in credit card debt or the almost $15,000 deficient balance on his auto 
loan. Despite the significant debt that was accruing because of his separation 
and divorce, he waited to sell his house. Currently, he has a payment plan in 
place for only two debts (child support and attorney’s fee), and he paid one small 
debt on the day of the hearing. Applicant's failure to establish a more 
comprehensive plan to deal with his substantial indebtedness is not responsible, 
and he receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 Neither can AG ¶ 20(c) or AG ¶ 20(d) be applied. Applicant’s financial 
situation is not under control. He owes approximately $90,000. Most of the SOR 
debts are unpaid, with no substantiated payment plans in place. Without 
evidence of a comprehensive plan to resolve debts, a good-faith effort cannot be 
substantiated.  
 
 Although Applicant receives some mitigation based on AG ¶ 20(b), I 
conclude that it is insufficient to outweigh the disqualifying conditions. I find 
against Applicant under Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate 
the applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and 
have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have 
also reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors 
listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
 
8  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the 
appropriate guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 When Applicant's debts started to become delinquent, he was a mature 
and experienced father and husband 36 years of age. Applicant maintained solid 
credit before his divorce. However, the significant legal fees from his protracted 
legal battles, and the court-ordered alimony and child support, were 
circumstances that Applicant did not foresee. In addition, his anticipated profit 
from his home sale disappeared following the housing market collapse.  
 
 Because of these circumstances, Applicant found it difficult to meet his 
obligations, and numerous debts became delinquent in 2007. However, Applicant 
did not demonstrate a responsible approach to dealing with his mounting debt. 
Despite a substantial income, he made no attempt to resolve his $70,000 in 
credit card debt or his auto loan deficiency. He did not file bankruptcy, which can 
offer a legitimate path to resolving insurmountable debt. He postponed selling his 
house despite his high levels of child support, alimony and legal fees.  
 
 Among those who apply for security clearances, Applicant has 
accumulated an exceptionally high amount of delinquent debt. He does have a 
payment plan in place for two debts, and he did paid one small debt—on the day 
of the hearing. However, the two large debts that are paid or being paid—the 
mortgage loans and the child support—are paid through the action of the 
mortgage lender, or the state, rather than Applicant. He did not set up payment 
plans or provide evidence to show good-faith efforts to resolve his remaining 
debts. As a result, he still carries about $90,000 in delinquencies, with no 
documented plan in place to resolve it. An applicant is not required to be debt-
free, or establish that he paid every debt. But he must demonstrate that he 
established a plan to resolve his debts and has taken significant action to 
implement that plan. Considering that Applicant has not established such a plan, 
it would be premature at this point in time to grant him access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
9  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by 
section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.g.  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h. – 1.i.  For Applicant   
  Subparagraph 1.j.   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.k. – 1.m.  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.n.   Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
