 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09039 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on April 17, 2008. On April 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On June 1, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 15, 2009. 
The case was assigned to me on July 24, 2009. On August 3, 2009, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 25, 2009. The case was heard on that 
date. The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. The Applicant testified and offered six exhibits which were marked 
as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - E. The record was held open until September 8, 2009, to 
 
2 
 
 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents. No additional documents were 
submitted. The transcript was received on September 10, 2009.  Based upon a review 
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits SOR allegations 1.a – 1.e, and 
denies SOR allegations 1.f and 1.g because he did not recognize the debts.   
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old truck driver employed by a Department of Defense 
contractor who is applying for a security clearance. He has worked for his current 
employer since July 2007. This is his first time applying for a security clearance. He is a 
high school graduate. He is married and has one son, age 11. (Tr at 4-5, 23, 35-36; Gov 
1.)  
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he had the 
following delinquent accounts: a $23,503 debt as a result of a voluntary repossession of 
a leased 18-wheel semi-truck in 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 4 at 1; Gov 5 at 5); a $2,633 
credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 4 at 1, 2; Gov 5 at 3, 6); a 
$1,130 credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 4 at 1; Gov 5 at 5); a 
$1,747 computer account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 3); a 
$773 cell phone account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 6); a 
$128 medical account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 5 at 4); and a $199 medical 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 5 at 4). 
 
During 2000 – 2004, Applicant owned his own business. In August 2000, he 
entered into a lease-to-purchase agreement for a semi-truck in the amount of $94,000. 
He used the truck for his business. In 2003, business was slow and he started to have 
difficulty making several payments, including his truck payments. He leased the truck to 
another company in order to earn more money. The company never paid Applicant for 
his services. Applicant claims the company owed him approximately $20,000. He took 
the company to court. The court awarded an $11,500 judgment to Applicant. Although 
attempts have been made, he has been unable to collect the money from the judgment. 
(Tr at 27-32; Answer to SOR.) The lack of payment from this company created an 
additional financial burden on Applicant. 
 
Applicant contacted the finance department of the company with whom he had 
the lease-to-purchase agreement when he started to have difficulty making payments. 
The finance department suggested that he turn the semi-truck back in because he owed 
less than the blue book value of the truck. Applicant owed $38,000. The semi-truck had 
low mileage, was in good condition, and was valued at $40,000 - $45,000.  After 
Applicant voluntarily surrendered the truck, the truck sold at auction for approximately 
$12,000. He has not paid the $23,503 (SOR ¶ 1.a) because he disputes the amount of 
the debt. He believes he was misled by the company finance department to turn in the 
semi-truck. He believes they did not sell the semi-truck for the amount that it was worth. 
 
3 
 
 
He hired an attorney pertaining to this debt. His attorney advised him not to contact the 
company’s finance department because the five-year statute of limitations runs in 
December 2009. (Tr at 29-32; Gov 2 at 5; Answer to SOR) A credit report dated 
November 19, 2008, indicates Applicant formally disputed the debt with the credit 
reporting agency. (Gov 4 at 1)   
 
When Applicant owned his own business, he was on the road a large majority of 
the month. His wife was responsible for paying the bills. He discovered that she is not 
good at handling the family finances as indicated by some of the delinquent accounts. 
He took over the responsibility of paying the monthly bills and began to resolve the 
delinquent accounts. (Tr at 34)  
 
 Aside from the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a which is discussed above, the status 
of the remaining delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, $2,633 credit card account placed for collection: Account settled on 
April 30, 2009.  (Tr at 19, 25-26; AE C) This allegation is found in Applicant’s favor. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $1,130 credit account placed for collection: Applicant contends this is 
the same debt as the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  The most recent credit report, dated 
November 19, 2008, lists a zero balance. (Tr at 25-26, 28; Gov 4 at 1) This allegation is 
found in Applicant’s favor. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d, $1,747 computer account placed for collection: Account paid on 
February 19, 2009. (Tr at 18-19; AE B) This allegation is found in Applicant’s favor. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $773 cell phone account placed for collection: Account paid on May 
12, 2009. (Tr at 22; AE F) This allegation is found in Applicant’s favor. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g, medical bills in the amount of $128 and $199: Accounts 
were paid on August 24, 2009.  When Applicant contacted the company he discovered 
two additional medical bills. All medical bills were resolved. (Tr at 21; AE E) These 
allegations are found in Applicant’s favor.   
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,400. His wife’s net monthly income is 
$1,100. He estimates that he and his wife’s monthly expenses are $2,400. They have 
approximately $1,100 left over each month after expenses. (Tr at 23-24) Applicant is not 
aware of any additional delinquent accounts. He has no open credit card accounts. He 
has two loans with a credit union, a car loan and a signature loan. The total balance for 
both loans is $3,000. He is current on federal and state taxes. (Tr at 33-34) 
 
A loan officer from the credit union where Applicant does business wrote a letter 
on his behalf. She indicates Applicant has been a customer since August 1992. He has 
taken out several signature loans and automobile loans over that period of time. He 
makes his payments on time and is a very honorable person. (AE A)  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant states that he learned a hard lesson when he was running his own 
business. He has worked for a reputable company during the past two years. He 
testified that no amount of money would make him do anything against the United 
States.  (Tr at 36, 41-42) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant had financial difficulties in 
2003 due to a business downturn and the default of a significant bill by a business 
associate. The SOR alleged seven delinquent accounts, an approximate total balance 
of $30,113. Of that amount, $23,503 relates to the voluntary repossession of a semi-
truck.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant 
struggled financially in 2003 to 2004 when he was operating his own business. He was 
unaware that some of the accounts became delinquent when his wife was handling the 
finances. He took over handling the family finances and has resolved all of the 
delinquent accounts with the exception of the truck repossession. Based on the record 
evidence, Applicant may have a valid dispute with regard to this debt. This outstanding 
debt does not raise doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.    
 
6 
 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies. Applicant’s financial problems were 
caused by a business downturn in 2003. A business associate defaulted on a significant 
bill owed to Applicant’s company. He obtained a judgment against the company but 
efforts to collect on the debt have been unsuccessful. Circumstances beyond his control 
created his financial problems. Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Upon gaining employment with a reputable company, he resolved all of his delinquent 
accounts with the exception of the debt dealing with the truck repossession. He 
consulted an attorney regarding this debt and disputes the amount of the debt.  Under 
the circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly towards his financial situation.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies. Applicant has not received financial counseling but there are clear 
indications that his financial problems are under control. He paid six of the seven 
delinquent accounts.  
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant resolved six of the seven 
delinquent accounts. He has taken reasonable steps with regard to the remaining debt 
which is his largest debt. While that debt remains unresolved, he formally disputed the 
debt on his credit report and has consulted an attorney regarding the debt. Overall, he 
has made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a which involves the voluntary 
truck repossession. Applicant disputes the amount of the debt. He consulted an attorney 
regarding the debt and is following the advice of his attorney. He also formally disputed 
the debt on his credit report. FC MC ¶ 20(e) applies with respect to SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that a business 
downturn in 2003-2004 resulted in Applicant being unable to pay all of his bills. I 
considered that Applicant resolved six of the seven debts. His largest debt remains. 
With regards to this debt, I considered that Applicant was unable to pay his truck 
payments because a business associate defaulted on a significant bill, resulting in his 
voluntary return of the truck. He responsibly sought a judgment against his business 
associate but has not been successful in obtaining payment on the judgment. 
Circumstances beyond his control contributed to his financial problems. Aside from the 
truck repossession, he only had $6,610 in delinquent consumer debt indicating 
Applicant does not live extravagantly. He charged what he needed as opposed to 
making frivolous purchases. He disputes the amount of the debt owed for the truck 
repossession. He retained an attorney regarding this debt and is following his attorney’s 
advice. Based on the all of the information in the record, Applicant has proven that he is 
not a security risk. He mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
