                                                              
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
 -------------------   ) ISCR Case No. 08-02864 
 SSN: -----------   ) 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the United States. Applicant, his father, brother, and two 
uncles have connections to Iran, Germany, or both countries. However, Applicant has 
not been to Iran, or communicated with anyone living in Iran for more than 15 years. 
Applicant has more significant connections to Germany. Applicant terminated his 
access to his German passport. He has significantly greater contacts with the United 
States than with Germany. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of U.S. interests. Foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 3, 2005, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (e-
QIP version) (hereinafter SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On December 8, 2008, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and 
B (Foreign Influence) (GE 7). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On January 12, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (GE 8). On February 10, 2009, Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed. On February 11, 2009, the case was assigned to an administrative 
judge. On March 10, 2009, the case was transferred to another administrative judge. On 
March 16, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for April 21, 2009 
(GE 6). Applicant requested a delay in his hearing, and the delay was approved. The 
case was then transferred to me on April 16, 2009. On April 17, 2009, DOHA issued a 
hearing notice setting the hearing for May 21, 2009 (GE 4). The hearing was held on 
May 21, 2009, as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits 
(GE 1-3) (Transcript (Tr.) 17-18), and Applicant offered 12 exhibits (Tr. 18-19; AE A-L). 
There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-3 (Tr. 18), and AE A-L (Tr. 19). 
Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and the hearing notices (GE 4-
8). On May 29, 2009, I received the hearing transcript. I granted several post-hearing 
delays to give Applicant time to divest himself of his property in Germany (Hearing 
Exhibit I). On June 10, 2009, Applicant submitted a letter from an attorney about 
transfer of his property in Germany (AE M). Department Counsel did not object to the 
admission of this document, and I admitted it into evidence. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Islamic Republic of Iran (hereinafter Iran) (Tr. 10-11). Department Counsel provided 
supporting documents to show detail and context for these facts in the Administrative 
Notice request. Applicant and Department Counsel did not object to me taking 
administrative notice of all of the facts in all of the documents (Tr. 10-11). See the Iran 
section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material facts from 
Department Counsel’s submissions on Iran. During the hearing, it became apparent that 
Applicant has significantly stronger connections to Germany than to Iran. I advised the 
parties that I would be taking administrative notice of materials from the Department of 
State website pertaining to Germany (Tr. 65). There was no objection to my proposal 
(Tr. 65). The document from the Department of State website, “Background Note: 
Germany” (June 2009), available at http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3997.htm is labeled 
Hearing Exhibit II and attached to Applicant’s Exhibits. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in his response to the SOR (GE 8). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old senior research scientist (Tr. 21-22). Applicant does 
not currently possess a security clearance; however, he needs a clearance to enhance 
his employment (Tr. 21). Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in mathematics and 
computer science, and a master’s degree in computer science in the United States (Tr. 
22). He registered for the U.S. selective service system (Tr. 24). His professional goal is 
to improve the cyber defenses of the United States (Tr. 28). 
 
Applicant was born in the United States. When he was about six months old, 
Applicant and his family moved to Germany (Tr. 22-23, 36). After completing high 
school in Germany, Applicant moved back to the United States when he was 17 (Tr. 23, 
36). When he was in high school and during the summers when he was in college, he 
worked in Germany (Tr. 37). Applicant has never married and does not have any 
children (Tr. 33, 35). He has not served in the U.S. or German military (Tr. 24, 35).  
 
Applicant has one brother and no sisters (Tr. 22). His brother is a dual citizen of 
the United States and Germany, who currently resides in Germany (Tr. 23).  
 
Foreign preference and Germany 
 
 Although Applicant was born in the United States, he received his German 
citizenship through his mother, who was a German citizen (Tr. 34). Applicant has held a 
German passport since he reached the age of 18 (Tr. 39). Applicant reapplied for a 
German passport, which was issued in July 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.a; Tr. 38). Applicant most 
recently used his German passport to enter Germany and the European Union in 
August 2005 and in 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Tr. 40). On November 6, 2008, Applicant 
surrendered his German passport to his facility security officer (Tr. 26, 37-38; AE A). 
 
Applicant admitted in his SOR response that he used his German citizenship to 
protect his financial interests in rental and interest income from 1996 to 2008 (SOR ¶ 
1.c; GE 8). He could not give any examples of how his German citizenship made any 
difference in his financial interests (Tr. 47). He explained that his SOR response was his 
agreement with DOHA’s interpretation of the information he provided. As an example of 
benefits received from the German government, in 2000, Applicant had his wisdom 
teeth removed in Germany (Tr. 45). His father paid for the portion not paid by the 
German government (Tr. 46). He has never voted in a German election (Tr. 46). He is 
 
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
not registered to vote in Germany (Tr. 46). He does not have any retirement accounts in 
Germany (Tr. 46). Although he has a German driver’s license, he does not have a 
German residency registration (Tr. 50).  
 
 On December 13, 2007, Applicant told an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator that he was not willing to renounce his German citizenship (SOR ¶ 
1.d). Applicant is a German citizen and he intends to remain a German citizen (Tr. 34). 
On July 22, 2008, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory and said that he had a 
duty and obligation to follow Germany’s law and fulfill the responsibilities of a German 
citizen (SOR ¶ 1.e).  
 
On November 12, 2008, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory and 
stated that if a military conflict arose between Germany and the United States, he had 
“no automatic” answer about which side he would choose (SOR ¶ 1.f). He also said he 
is bound by the laws of the United States and the laws of Germany, and he intended to 
keep his obligations to both countries (SOR ¶ 1.g). When his counsel asked him about 
his allegiance to the United States or Germany, Applicant said, “I will not violate the 
U.S. laws or Constitution” (Tr. 25).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant explained that if there was a conflict between the United 
States and Germany he would side with the United States (Tr. 48). He did not want to 
serve in the German military (Tr. 25). He does not intend to move to Germany (Tr. 48). 
However, if he was unemployed in the United States, he would consider moving to 
Germany for employment (Tr. 49). Applicant has a stronger relationship to the United 
States than to Germany because he has lived his adult life in the United States (Tr. 49). 
The United States has provided his post-secondary education (Tr. 49). He pays taxes to 
the United States (Tr. 49). He has an uncle and some cousins who live in the United 
States (Tr. 50).  
 
Foreign Influence of Iran and Germany 
 
Applicant’s father is a dual citizen of Iran and Germany, who resides in Germany. 
His father is a 78-year-old retiree (Tr. 56). Applicant contacts his father about once a 
week by telephone and by email about once a month (SOR ¶ 2.a). His father has family 
members living in Iran (SOR ¶ 2.b). His father practiced medicine in Germany for many 
years and is now a retired physician (Tr. 29, 51). He retired in the early 1990s (Tr. 30). 
Applicant’s father visits Iran about once each year (Tr. 56).  Applicant does not speak 
Persian and his communication with his Iranian relatives is very limited (Tr. 59).  
Applicant went to Iran twice when he was 14 or 15, and then did not return (Tr. 63). He 
does not intend to travel to Iran in the future (Tr. 63). The last time that he talked to a 
relative living in Iran was when he visited Iran (Tr. 64).    
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Germany, who resides in Germany (SOR ¶ 2.c). 
He contacted his mother about once a week by telephone and by email about once a 
month (SOR ¶ 2.c). His mother passed away shortly before his hearing, and he traveled 
to Germany for her funeral in June 2009 (Tr. 26). He used his U.S. passport to secure 
his planned trip to Germany for her funeral (Tr. 26).  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
 
Applicant’s brother is a dual citizen of Germany and the United States, who 
resides in Germany (SOR ¶ 2.d; Tr. 53). His brother lived in the United States for two 
years in the early 1990s and then returned to Germany (Tr. 53). He is in contact with his 
brother by telephone about once a month (SOR ¶ 2.d). His brother was drafted into and 
served in the German military for the required time period (Tr. 53). His brother works for 
a private company in Germany (Tr. 53). His brother is not married (Tr. 54). 
 
Applicant’s uncle (A), who lives in the United States, was a professor at an 
Iranian University during the 1980s. Uncle A has traveled back to Iran as recently as 
2008 (SOR ¶ 2.e). Uncle A has lived in the United States since the 1990s (Tr. 57). 
Uncle A is probably still an Iranian citizen (Tr. 58). Applicant did not think uncle A was 
receiving a pension from the Iranian government (Tr. 58).  
 
Applicant’s uncle (M) was a city civil servant in Iran (SOR ¶ 2.f; Tr. 54). He is 
currently retired (Tr. 55). Applicant has not had any contact with uncle M for many years 
(Tr. 56). Applicant’s father probably had contact with uncle M; however, Applicant did 
not know the extent of the contact (Tr. 56).  
 
Applicant’s uncle (H) lives in France and retains his Iranian citizenship (Tr. 59).  
Applicant met uncle H when he visited France several years ago (Tr. 59).   
 
Applicant co-owned a house and rental property located in Germany with his 
brother (SOR ¶ 2.g). On December 31, 2008, the German house was sold (Tr. 30). 
Applicant’s share of the sales proceeds was about 20,000 Euros (Tr. 40). He deposited 
the 20,000 Euros in his U.S. bank account (Tr. 41).  
 
Applicant has a half interest in another German property with an appraised value 
of approximately 700,000 Euros (SOR ¶ 2.g; Tr. 41-42). His brother is a co-owner (Tr. 
41-42). This property is a two-family unit, and his father lives in part of the dwelling (Tr. 
41). Applicant’s father used part of the unit several years ago as commercial office 
space (Tr. 44). There is a mortgage of 20,000 Euros on the property (Tr. 46). The rent 
has varied from about 300 Euros to about 3,000 Euros per month (Tr. 43). Applicant 
stopped receiving any rental income from the property in November or December of 
2008 (Tr. 42). They are trying to sell the property for about 600,000 Euros (Tr. 43). He 
does not own any other properties in Germany (Tr. 34, 47). On June 10, 2009, Applicant 
provided a letter from his German attorney indicating confirmation of a “contract of 
mandate regarding the sale of [his] real estate .  .  .  After consultation with the tax 
consultant, [his attorney] will submit a proposal for further proceedings” (AE M).  
 
Applicant has a bank account in Germany valued at about 6,000 Euros (SOR ¶ 
2.h; Tr. 44). At the hearing, Applicant said he intended to close the account (Tr. 30).  
 
Applicant traveled to Germany in 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005 
to visit family members and friends (SOR ¶ 2.i). Applicant has three friends in Germany, 
and he visits them when he goes to Germany (Tr. 59, 60). He does not regularly 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
es.       
                                           
communicate with one of his friends (Tr. 60). He sends an email or calls the other two 
friends about once a month (Tr. 61-62). 
 
 Applicant does not have a criminal record (Tr. 33). He owns his home in the 
United States, which is valued at about $87,000 (Tr. 35). His home does not have a 
mortgage (Tr. 35). He has about $30,000 in his U.S. savings and checking accounts (Tr. 
35). He has about $10,000 in his U.S. IRA and about $25,000 in his U.S. 401(K) plan 
(Tr. 35). 
 
References 
 
Applicant provided several good performance evaluations from his employers 
(Tr. 26; AE B-D). He received a marketing award from his employer (Tr. 28; AE H). He 
completed 22 hours of community emergency response training to assist him as a 
volunteer with the community emergency response team (Tr. 27; AE F, G, I).  
 
Appellant provided a letter from another friend, who has known him for six 
years.2 She has lived with Applicant and traveled to Germany with Applicant. She 
described him as honest, caring, and helpful. Applicant is civic-minded and patriotic. He 
actively participated at caucus meetings and other U.S. election activiti
  
Applicant’s friend and colleague of many years described him as a “role model of 
excellence and integrity” (AE E). He has made an influential, positive impact on his 
friend’s life (AE E). 
 
Another of Applicant’s friends and colleagues, who has known him since 2007, 
described him as a “gifted individual with a strong sense of duty and responsibility to the 
organization he works for” and the U.S. government (AE K). He indicated Applicant is 
loyal, honest, thoughtful, and generous with a “true desire to improve the country he 
lives in” (AE J). Applicant’s talent, character, and qualifications make him a valuable 
asset to the United States. 
   
Iran3 
 
Iran is a constitutional, theocratic Islamic republic in which Shi’a Muslim clergy 
dominate the key power structures and ultimate political authority is vested in a learned 
religious scholar. Iran engages in clandestine efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and 
other weapons of mass destruction (WMD), sponsors international terrorism, intervenes 
in the internal affairs of Iraq, undermines the Middle East peace process, and violates 
the human rights of the Iranian people. The United States and its allies are attempting to 
block Iran’s goals of obtaining nuclear weapons and other WMD and to counter Iran’s 
efforts to destabilize Iraq and other Middle East countries.  Iran has sought to illegally 
obtain U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology.  
 
2 A May 19, 2009, letter from his friend provides the source for the facts in this paragraph. 
 
3The facts in the section concerning Iran are from the Department Counsel’s documents 
submitted for Administrative Notice.  
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
 
Iran is one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism. The United States is 
concerned about the possibility that terrorists could eventually obtain WMD from Iran. 
Iran supports terrorists who attack Israel and have encouraged, facilitated and engaged 
in sectarian violence in Iraq. 
 
Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizens, should carefully consider the risks of 
travel in Iran because they are still considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities. 
Iran does not recognize dual citizenship. The Iranian government has harassed and 
detained dual citizens of the United States and Iran.       
 
The Iranian government has a poor human rights record. The Iranian government 
sponsors torture, stoning, amputation and other severe punishments of Iranian citizens. 
Civil liberties in Iran are severely restricted.  
  
Germany4 
 
The relationship between Germany and the United States has been close since 
the end of World War II. Germany is a key partner in U.S. relations with Europeans in 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Union. 
 
More than 7 million Germans have immigrated over the last three centuries, and 
today nearly a quarter of U.S. citizens claim German ancestry. U.S. policy toward 
Germany is to preserve a close and vital relationship with Germany, not only as friends 
and trading partners, but also as allies. During the 45 years in which Germany was 
divided, the large American military presence in West Germany showed the U.S. 
commitment to preserving peace and security in Europe.  
 
As NATO allies, the United States and Germany work closely together to 
maintain peace and freedom, especially in Europe with recent emphasis on peace 
keeping in the Balkans. Germany is an important contributor to our common effort in 
Afghanistan, providing about 3,500 military personnel to the NATO ISAF mission, 
making it the third-largest troop contributor after the United States and the United 
Kingdom.  
 
Germany is a U.S. ally in the campaign against terrorism. The United States and 
Germany share a common commitment to an open and expanding world economy. 
Personal ties between the United States and Germany extend beyond immigration to 
include extensive foreign exchange programs, vast tourism in both directions, and the 
presence in Germany of large numbers of American military personnel and their 
dependents. 
 
The United States is Germany’s second-largest trading partner. Two-way trade in 
goods totaled $152 billion in 2008. Major U.S. export categories include aircraft, 
 
4 The facts in this section concerning Germany are from the U.S. State Department website, 
“Background Note: Germany,” (June 2009). See Procedural Ruling section, supra, at 2.  
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
electrical equipment, telecommunications equipment, data processing equipment, and 
motor vehicles and parts.  
 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence) are the 
relevant security concerns with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 articulates the Government’s concern about foreign preference, stating, 
“when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country 
over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” Conditions under AG ¶ 
10 that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case include: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests 
in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and  
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant became a U.S. citizen by virtue of his birth in the United States. His 
parents took him to Germany when he was about six months old, where he was raised, 
received educational and medical benefits, and exercised other attributes of German 
citizenship. He returned to the United States when he was 17 years old; however, he 
obtained and used a German passport after returning to the United States. Disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(a)(3) apply. Although he admitted in his SOR 
response that he used his German “citizenship to protect [his German] financial or 
business interests,” at his hearing he said he was agreeing with DOHA’s interpretation 
in the SOR of his conduct. There was no record evidence of a specific advantage he 
received in his business or financial relationships due to his German citizenship. AG ¶ 
10(a)(5) is not established. Applicant made several statements in response to DOHA 
interrogatories that showed he had not fully abandoned his relationship with Germany. 
He said he would obey the laws of Germany; he was not willing to renounce his German 
citizenship; and he wanted to retain his German citizenship. He said he would comply 
with the requirements of German citizenship. These statements show a sufficient loyalty 
or bond to Germany to establish AG ¶ 10(d).  
 
Under AG ¶ 11, conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
Applicant’s exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of German citizenship 
occurred when Applicant was a minor, except for his possession and use of his German 
passport to enter Germany. On November 6, 2008, Applicant surrendered his German 
passport to his facility security officer. AG ¶¶ 11(c) and 11(e) apply. The applicability of 
these two mitigating conditions cannot be applied to fully mitigate Guideline C concerns 
because his statements responding to interrogatories showing some loyalty and bond to 
Germany are more problematic.5 Such concerns are mitigated under the Whole Person 
Concept, infra. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
Applicant was born in the United States and moved to Germany when he was six 
months old. He spent the next 17 years in Germany. He attended German primary and 
secondary schools. He received medical, educational, and other benefits from the 
German government. After returning to the United States, he used a German passport 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 08-05869 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 24, 2009) (deciding that these two mitigating 
conditions were insufficient to mitigate “profound consequences of a voluntary decision by a U.S. citizen 
to serve in [Australia’s] military” under Guideline C).   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
to enter Germany almost every year for the last nine years. His father and brother are 
citizens of Germany. His brother is also a citizen of the United States. Applicant 
communicates frequently with his father, brother, and two German friends. Additionally, 
his father goes to Iran annually and communicates frequently with his family in Iran. 
Applicant’s father and uncles are Iranian citizens. One of Applicant’s uncles and some 
cousins live in Iran.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person living in a foreign country 
or who is a citizen of a foreign country, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country, and an Applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for 
foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. 
See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 
(App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Iran with the United States, places a significant, but not insurmountable 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his and his father’s relationship 
with family members who are citizens of Iran or living in Iran do not pose a security risk. 
Additionally, Applicant’s relationships with his father, brother, and two German friends 
living in Germany, and his statements about his German citizenship raise security 
concerns, although to a much lesser degree because of Germany’s close relationship 
with the United States, adherence to the rule of law, and democratic government.  
 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to 
choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to protect his family members 
living in Iran from harm, pressure, enticement, or coercion.6 With Iran’s negative human 
rights record, support for terrorism, and the high levels of crime in Iran as well as other 
political, economic and military problems in the country, it is conceivable that anyone 
living in Iran might be targeted by governmental or non-governmental criminal elements 
in an attempt to gather information from the United States. 
 
Iran has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other sensitive 
technology from the United States. Applicant’s connections to his family living in Iran 
 
6 An applicant with relatives in Iran, for example, has a much heavier burden to overcome than an 
applicant with relatives living in Germany. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) 
(stating an applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when 
parents and siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(articulating “very heavy burden” standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran); ISCR 
Case No. 07-12471 at 9 (A.J. May 30, 2008) (listing numerous recent cases involving U.S. citizens with 
Iranian connections whose clearances were denied, and citing no recent cases where the Appeal Board 
affirmed the grant of a clearance for someone with immediate family members living in Iran). 
 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
raise a sufficient concern to require careful scrutiny. An evaluation is necessary about 
any possible desire for him to assist relatives living in Iran by providing sensitive or 
classified information.    
 
Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with 
his relatives who are citizens of Iran or Germany or live in Iran or Germany to raise the 
issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply 
and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies; however, AG ¶¶ 8(c), 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply 
because the U.S. government has not encouraged his involvement with Iranian or 
German citizens, his travel to Germany, or other German connections. Applicant has 
frequent contact with his father, brother, and two friends. His father has frequent contact 
with his brother, who lives in Iran. Additionally, Applicant has gone to Germany almost 
every year for the last nine years. His contacts with family members and friends living 
outside the United States are sufficiently frequent to raise the possibility of his being 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                             
forced to choose between the United States and the welfare of his relatives or friends, 
who are citizens of Germany or Iran and/or living in Germany or Iran. Applicant is not 
able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships 
with his relatives who are Iranian citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. There is no evidence that his relatives, who are German 
or Iranian citizens and/or are living in Germany or Iran are or have been political 
activist(s), challenging the policies of the German or Iranian governments. There is no 
evidence that terrorists, criminals, or the German or Iranian governments have 
approached or threatened Applicant or his relatives living outside the United States for 
classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that his 
relatives living overseas or Applicant himself would be targets for coercion or 
exploitation. While the government does not have a burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a very 
heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns.   
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He established that “he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant is a native-born, 
U.S. citizen. He received his post-secondary education in the United States. Applicant 
resides in the United States, and would not move to Germany unless he could not find 
employment in the United States and could find employment in Germany. One of his 
uncles lives in the United States. His brother, who lives in Germany, is a U.S.-born 
citizen. He has bank accounts, a 401(K) account, and a home in the United States, and 
he is divesting himself of financial interests in Germany. His employment is in the United 
States. He has participated in the U.S. political process. He is a volunteer in U.S. 
emergency medicine.   
  
AG ¶ 8(f) partially applies because Applicant is divesting himself of financial 
interests in Germany. This mitigating condition can only mitigate AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to Germany or Iran are less significant than his 
connections to the United States. His connections to the United States taken together 
are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns.  Any residual 
foreign influence security concerns are mitigated under the Whole Person Concept, 
infra. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
15 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
A Guideline B and C decision concerning Iran or Germany must take into 
consideration the geopolitical situations in those two countries, as well as the dangers 
existing in them.7 Iran has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other 
sensitive technology. It has very serious economic, military, political, judicial/legal and 
social problems. Iran sponsors terrorism and is hostile to the United States. If Iran could 
obtain important classified information through threatening Applicant’s relatives living in 
or visiting Iran, it is a reasonable possibility that Iranian authorities would take those 
actions.       
 
The United States’ relationship with Germany is completely different from its 
relationship with Iran. The United States and Germany are closely related. From the end 
of World War II in 1945 to the present time, Germany has been one of the United 
States’ closest military and diplomatic allies. Through most of those years the United 
States and West Germany confronted the Soviet Union and its satellite countries in 
Central Europe. The relationship between the United States and Germany was 
especially close in the area of national security. Hundreds of thousands of U.S. military 
personnel have served in Germany (some for many years), and many have German-
born spouses and children. Numerous German personnel have trained in the United 
States. Currently, German and U.S. military personnel serve together under combat 
conditions in Afghanistan. This very close relationship is one of mutual trust, where 
highly classified information is routinely shared between Germany and the United 
States. It is extraordinarily unlikely that Germany would use Applicant’s relatives living in 
Germany to attempt to obtain classified information from Applicant.      
 
Applicant’s relationships with his two uncles and cousins living in Iran are too 
remote to cause security concerns. Applicant last visited Iran when he was 15 years old, 
about 18 years ago. He has not communicated with his family in Iran since he was 15 
years old. If there is any concern about Iran, it is because Applicant’s 78-year-old father 
travels to Iran on an annual basis. Theoretically, during one of those visits, Iranian 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
16 
                                                                                                                                             
authorities could use Applicant’s father to coerce Applicant. Applicant could be placed in 
a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States, especially because 
the Iranian government engages in lawless activities (sponsors terrorism, etc.). Because 
Iran behaves in a lawless manner, the probability is increased that Iran may attempt to 
harm or pressure Applicant’s relatives to gain some kind of advantage over Applicant.  
Nevertheless, Applicant’s relationship with the United States is so much stronger than 
his relationship with Iran, I am confident he would inform security authorities of any 
Iranian attempt to obtain classified information from him.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with Germany is much more significant than his 
relationship with Iran. Applicant traveled to Germany on an annual basis for the last nine 
years. He had a German passport until 2008, which he used to travel to Germany until 
recently. He frequently communicates with his father, brother, and two friends, who live 
in Germany. Applicant is a German citizen because his mother was a German citizen. 
He has a German driver’s license; however, he does not have a German residency 
registration.  
 
Applicant is not willing to renounce his German citizenship. He intends to remain 
a German citizen. He said that he had a duty and obligation to follow Germany’s laws 
and fulfill the responsibilities of a German citizen. If a military conflict arose between 
Germany and the United States, Applicant had “no automatic” answer about which side 
he would choose. He also said he is bound by the laws of the United States and the 
laws of Germany, and he intended to keep his obligations to both countries. When his 
counsel asked him about his allegiance to the United States or Germany, Applicant 
said, “I will not violate the U.S. laws or Constitution.”  
 
At his hearing, Applicant explained that if there was a conflict between the United 
States and Germany he would side with the United States. He did not want to serve in 
the Germany military. He does not intend to move to Germany. However, if he was 
unemployed in the United States, he would consider moving to Germany for 
employment. Applicant has a stronger relationship with the United States than to 
Germany because he has chosen to live, and has lived, his adult life in the United 
States. The United States has provided his post-secondary education. He pays taxes to 
the United States. He has an uncle and some cousins who live in the United States.  I 
find his statements about his preference for the United States over Germany to be 
credible. 
 
His communications establish ties of affection to his German family members. 
However, it is extraordinarily unlikely that Germany would use Applicant’s family living in 
Germany to induce or coerce him into providing classified information.  
 
The circumstances militating towards approval of a clearance are more 
significant. Applicant was born in the United States. He left Germany 18 years ago, just 
after graduating from high school. He has earned his bachelor’s and master’s degrees 
at U.S. universities. He and his facility security officer documented the termination of his 
access to his German passport. Applicant provided employment evaluations and 
 
17 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
statements from friends. His character references, marketing award, and voluntary 
support of emergency services evidence his dedication, responsibility, trustworthiness, 
professionalism, reliability, integrity, and active involvement in his community. Although 
the possibility of attempted exploitation of Applicant is relatively low, Applicant’s strong 
connections to the United States and especially to his U.S. community and employment 
establish “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  See AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
After weighing the evidence of his connections to Germany, to Iran, and to the 
United States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has carried his 
burden of mitigating the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”8 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
8See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
