 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02097 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On January 14, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E and J, Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 13, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 9, 2009, scheduling the hearing for July 9, 2009. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
 
2 
 
5. GE 1, 2, and 4 were admitted without objection. GE 3 and 5 were admitted over 
Applicant’s objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) 
A through E, which were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on July 16, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She served in the 
U.S. Air Force from 1991 to 1999, and was honorably discharged as a staff sergeant (E-
5). She has an associate’s degree and some additional college credits. She is married 
but separated, and has a 16-year-old child.1  
 
 The security concerns in this case are based on an arrest and a series of 
landlord-tenant issues. 
 
 Applicant was arrested on May 9, 2007, and charged with harboring a felon. The 
charge was dismissed in March 2008. The police report detailed the incident. A police 
officer (officer-1) was driving an unmarked car at about 8:15 in the morning on May 9, 
2007. He recognized a man (fugitive) driving a car (car-A), and thought the man had an 
outstanding felony warrant. He asked another officer (officer-2) to check if the man had 
a warrant. Officer-2 confirmed that the man had an outstanding felony warrant for 
receiving and transferring a stolen vehicle. Officer-1 saw the man drive into an 
apartment complex. When he arrived in the parking lot of the complex, he saw car-A 
parked, but the man was not in the car. They set up surveillance on the car.2 
 
 At about 10:00 that same morning, officer-2 saw Applicant walk in front of car-A 
and look around the area. Applicant went into the apartment complex and returned a 
short time later. She got into another vehicle (car-B), which was parked near car-A, and 
drove slowly around the parking lot. As she was driving, she looked at the undercover 
and uniformed officers in the parking lot. She then returned and parked next to car-A. 
Applicant got out of the car and entered the apartment building. She came out of the 
building a short time later and drove off in car-B.3 
 
 Applicant returned to the apartment complex in car-B at about 10:30 a.m. A man, 
later identified as the fugitive’s brother (brother), was with her. The brother opened car-
A and placed a backpack in the car. Applicant and the brother then went into the 
apartment building.4 
 
 At about 10:45 a.m., the brother left the apartment building and started to leave 
the parking lot in car-A. Two officers (officers-3 and 4) stopped the car. Officer-3 asked 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25, 44-45; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
the brother if the fugitive was driving car-A earlier in the day. The brother stated that the 
fugitive was not with him and he was not at the apartment complex. Officer-3 asked 
officer-1 to come to the scene to see if the brother was who officer-1 originally saw that 
morning driving car-A. Officer-1 had arrested the fugitive in the past and confirmed that 
it was the fugitive, and not the brother, that he observed driving car-A that morning. The 
brother originally stated that he had not seen the fugitive in several days. He eventually 
admitted that the fugitive was driving car-A that morning. He stated that Applicant came 
to the motel where he was staying and told him that undercover police were outside the 
apartment, and he needed to come and get car-A because the fugitive was hiding in her 
apartment. He showed the officers the apartment where the fugitive was hiding. It was 
Applicant’s apartment. He told the officers that Applicant and her husband were also in 
the apartment, and they knew that the police were there. He stated they knew that the 
fugitive had a felony warrant for his arrest. He told the police that he attempted to lure 
them away from the scene, in order to allow the fugitive to escape. They hoped that if 
the police stopped him, the police might think it was the brother who was driving car-A 
that morning.5 
 
 The police went to Applicant’s apartment. They knocked repeatedly on the door, 
rang the doorbell, and announced who they were, but nobody answered. They made 
numerous announcements from outside the apartment with a loudspeaker. The police 
special weapons and tactics (SWAT) team was called in, and they also made 
announcements over their loudspeaker. The fugitive eventually called the police on the 
telephone and told them he was coming out. The police were at the apartment for 
several hours before the fugitive came out of the apartment. After he was apprehended, 
he told the police that Applicant and her husband were inside the apartment. The SWAT 
team continued to make announcements over the loudspeaker, and Applicant came out 
a short time later. She was arrested. Her husband did not come out of the apartment. 
Applicant told the police that there was nobody left in the apartment. The police 
determined that Applicant’s husband had a felony warrant from another state for failing 
to pay child support. The state was contacted and the police were told that the state 
would not extradite Applicant’s husband if he was arrested. They decided not to do 
anything further about Applicant’s husband and they left the scene.6 
 
 Officer-1 asked the fugitive if he recognized the officer when they passed each 
other that morning. He stated that he did recognize the officer, and he knew he had a 
warrant for his arrest. The fugitive asked the officer why they did not go into the 
apartment and arrest Applicant’s husband. The officer told the fugitive it was because 
the other state would not extradite Applicant’s husband. The fugitive stated that he 
would have come out of the apartment but Applicant’s husband told him not to leave.7 
 
                                                          
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Id. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant provided a very different version of events. She gave her side of the 
story to her facility security officer (FSO), who reported it to the Defense Security 
Service (DSS) in an incident report dated May 18, 2007. She also described the incident 
to an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 20, 2007; 
in her response to the SOR; and at her hearing. She has consistently denied knowing 
that the fugitive had a warrant, any intent to harbor him, and any involvement in a plan 
for him to elude capture. She was inconsistent in other aspects of the incident.  
 
 Applicant told her FSO that the fugitive, who she only knew casually as a friend 
of a neighbor, came to her apartment to borrow her phone to call his mother to come 
pick him up. He asked if he could stay at her apartment until his mother arrived. He said 
he had his brother’s car but it hurt too much to drive the standard transmission because 
he had a broken pelvis. He offered her $5 in gas money if she would pick up his brother 
from a nearby location and bring him to the car, which she did. She then took a shower. 
She did not hear the police come to the door because she was in the shower. After the 
shower, she heard the police over the loudspeaker and went to open the door, but the 
fugitive blocked her way. She finally convinced him to call the police, and he left the 
apartment. She followed the advice of the police negotiator, and left shortly thereafter.8  
 
 Applicant told the OPM investigator a similar story in her June 2007 interview, 
except she stated that the fugitive’s mother was going to pick Applicant up at the 
brother’s motel after Applicant dropped the car off. Applicant also stated that she took 
her shower and the police arrived before she went to pick up the brother. The OPM 
interview was memorialized in a report of investigation (ROI). DOHA sent Applicant a 
copy of the ROI in an interrogatory and asked her if the ROI accurately reflected the 
information she provided to the investigator on the day she was interviewed. She was 
provided the opportunity to explain why the ROI was inaccurate and to add additional 
information regarding the matters discussed during the interview. She answered that the 
ROI was accurate and submitted additional information unrelated to the factual details 
of her arrest.9 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant stated: 
 
The individual I was accused of harboring was a casual acquaintance with 
a broken pelvis looking for a ride to the [county] court-house. I did not ask 
him why he was going to court and he did not tell me he was being chased 
by police at the time he asked for the favor. I was only interested in the 
gas money he was going to pay me as compensation for the ride. 
 
 Applicant testified essentially similar to her prior statements with some 
exceptions. She stated that the fugitive offered her gas money to drive him to the 
courthouse. She also stated that he was waiting on a phone call back from his mother, 
who might have been able to drive him to court. She stated that she went to the motel in 
                                                          
8 GE 4. 
 
9 GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
the fugitive’s car, car-A, and gave it to the brother, who drove her back to her apartment 
in car-A. She stated the brother never went into her apartment; he just dropped her off 
and left. This contradicts the police report that indicated that she and the brother were in 
her car, car-B, and the brother went into the apartment. She testified that her husband 
was not in the apartment and that the fugitive was alone in her apartment when she 
went to give the car to the brother.10 
 
 I did not find Applicant to be a credible witness. To the extent that Applicant’s 
testimony and prior statements varied from the account of events in the police report, I 
find the facts to be as detailed in the police report. I further find that Applicant provided 
intentionally false or misleading information to her FSO, to the OPM investigator, in her 
response to the SOR, and at her hearing.11 
 
 The remainder of the allegations against Applicant relate to disputes between 
Applicant and several landlords, and judgments obtained against her. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant terminated a lease with a realtor in 2005, and a 
judgment was entered against her in the approximate amount of $625, which she has 
satisfied. Applicant admitted that a judgment was entered against her, but denied that 
she had a lease with the property management company. She had what she felt was a 
defense to the lawsuit, but she lost the case.  She paid the judgment in about 2005.12 
 
 Applicant terminated a lease with another apartment landlord in 2006. A 
judgment of $1,261 was obtained against her. This was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant 
stated that a maintenance worker at the apartment complex illegally entered her 
apartment complex and stole some items and more than $900 in cash. She reported it 
to the landlord, but the landlord refused to do anything about it. She felt her only 
recourse was to move out. She owed about $400 in back rent when she moved, but she 
felt justified in not paying it because of the money that was stolen from her by the 
landlord’s employee. The judgment has not been satisfied.13 
 
 Applicant’s lease for her next apartment expired in about June 2007. Her landlord 
chose not to renew the lease, presumably because of the events with the police on May 
9, 2007, as described above. The landlord issued an eviction notice in June 2007, 
notifying Applicant that she had to vacate the apartment. These events were alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d.14 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 25-34, 47-53. 
 
11 It was not alleged in the SOR that Applicant provided false information to the FSO or falsified 
the OPM interview. Applicant’s statements will not be used for disqualification purposes. They will be 
considered in assessing Applicant’s credibility; in the application of mitigating conditions; and in 
evaluating the “whole person.” 
12 Tr. at 35, 45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 35-37, 45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5. 
 
14 Tr. at 37-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant had a dispute with the landlord of the next apartment where she lived. 
The landlord obtained a judgment of $1,024 against her in June 2008. This was alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. In her response to the SOR, Applicant stated that the judgment resulted 
from a miscommunication between the landlord and the landlord’s son, who acted as 
the property manager. She stated that she “satisfied the judgment in June 2008.” She 
admitted at the hearing that the judgment was not satisfied. She testified that this 
apartment was also burglarized. She stated that her documentation for her court case 
was stolen. She suspected the landlord as the thief. She also indicated that the landlord 
altered the summons so that she appeared in court the day after the hearing. She 
admitted that she did not phrase her response to the SOR very well, but she paid what 
she felt was justified. She never collected her security deposit, so she felt they were 
even.15 
 
 Applicant stated that she and her current landlord have had no problems. She 
submitted five letters attesting to her outstanding job performance. She is described as 
industrious, thorough, well-informed, intuitive, conscientious, responsible, trustworthy, 
hard-working, and reliable. She is recommended for a security clearance.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15 Tr. at 39-42, 45-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5. 
 
16 Tr. at 43-44; AE A-E. 
 
7 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant’s conduct of harboring a felon, as established by the police report, her 
arrest, and her charges, is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant was involved in harboring a felon in May 2007. The charges were 
eventually dismissed. Applicant has consistently denied her guilt. She indicated that she 
was unaware that the fugitive was wanted by the police. However, her statements are 
implausible and inconsistent. She gave false and misleading information to her FSO, to 
the OPM investigator, and in her response to the SOR; and she knowingly provided 
false testimony at her hearing. That does not show successful rehabilitation. No 
mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following mitigating condition is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 
 
9 
 
It is expected behavior in this society that one will pay his or her just debts. 
Applicant did not pay two judgments awarded against her. Her conduct as it relates to 
her unpaid judgments is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 16(e) as a disqualifying condition. The 
paid judgment and the eviction notice do not raise any disqualifying conditions. SOR ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.d are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Applicant’s May 2007 criminal activity was alleged under both Guideline J and 
Guideline E. It is conduct that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and 
duress. It establishes AG ¶ 16(e) as a disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant was dishonest about her criminal conduct on four occasions. No 
mitigating conditions are applicable to her actions on May 9, 2007, under the same 
rationale discussed above under the Criminal Conduct guideline. 
 
 Applicant provided explanations for why she did not pay the two judgments. 
However, they are lawful judgments issued by a court. She did not indicate any intent to 
pay the judgments. The total owed on the judgments does not amount to a large figure. 
By themselves, the unpaid judgments do not create a security concern. However, when 
considered with all other evidence, they indicate questionable reliability, trustworthiness, 
and judgment. No mitigating conditions are applicable to that conduct. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
10 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
considered Applicant’s service in the Air Force, and her very favorable character 
evidence. I considered the events of May 2007. Applicant’s version of events has been 
inconsistent and is simply incredible. Without complete candor, it is impossible to find 
that Applicant is rehabilitated, and that such events are unlikely to recur. Serious doubts 
remain about Applicant’s judgment, honesty, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
