1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08990
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 21, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR), in writing on February 23, 2009, and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on April 6, 2009. DOHA initially issued a notice of hearing on April
6, 2009, and the hearing was scheduled to be heard on April 29, 2009, in Las Vegas,
Nevada. At the request of Applicant, the hearing was rescheduled in Reno, Nevada, for
June 17, 2009. Applicant thereafter requested another continuance until after June,
when she would return from Iraq. On July 6, 2009, a third notice of hearing was issued,
and the hearing finally convened on August 14, 2009, in Las Vegas, Nevada. 
2
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and she submitted Exhibits A through J,
which were entered into evidence without objection. Two additional witnesses testified
on behalf of Applicant. The transcript (Tr) was received on August 20, 2009.  
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until August 28, 2009, to
submit additional matters.  She timely submitted four additional documents that have
been entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits K through N. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant
and the other witnesses, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the
following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 43 years old. She served in the U.S. Army from 1983 to 1991. She is
employed by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with her employment in the defense sector.
This SOR had a number of mistakes that have been amended to make the
appropriate corrections, and will be revealed as they are reviewed in this decision. First,
the name that is listed on the SOR is backwards, in that the first name is listed first,
rather than last as is proper. I have amended and corrected it so the last name is listed
first, consistent with DOHA procedures. 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 18 allegations of overdue debts, and two allegations regarding
bankruptcy, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The SOR has two 1.f and 1.g. allegations,
so the SOR goes from 1.a. through 1.g, and then starts with 1.f. through 1.t. The second
1.f. and 1.g. allegations will be identified as 1.f.(2) and 1.g.(2). Also there is no 1.p.
allegation listed in the SOR, so none will be addressed in this decision. All of the
allegations will be discussed in the same order as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $9,259 for a medical
bill. At the hearing, Applicant testified that this medical bill was incurred because of
treatment she received in a hospital, and she believed that it should have been paid by
her Veterans Administration (VA) health coverage, but thus far it has not been paid (Tr
at 40-43). Exhibit N is a letter from a Regional Representative of one of Applicant’s U.S.
Senators, dated August 26, 2009, who indicated that he has submitted an inquiry to the
VA regarding this debt for a medical claim after it was initially denied, and he is awaiting
a response. Unless the VA reverses its earlier ruling,  the debt is still owed. 
3
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $36 for a medical bill.
Applicant testified that she believed that this debt should have been paid by the VA, but
thus far it has been denied. She also indicated that she thought she might have made a
payment on this debt, so the record remained open to offer evidence of payment of this
debt. No evidence was submitted to show this debt has been paid (Tr at 45).
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $44 for a medical bill.
Applicant testified that she believed that this debt should also have been paid by the
VA, but thus far it has been denied. No evidence was submitted to show this debt has
been paid.
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $458 for a medical
bill. . Applicant testified that she believed that this debt should also have been paid by
the VA, but thus far it has been denied. No evidence was submitted to show this debt
has been paid.
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,183.  Applicant
testified that she has not paid this debt (Tr at 49).
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $710. Exhibit F, the
most current credit report, dated August 5, 2009, shows that this debt has been
resolved. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $498. Unfortunately,
it was not discovered at the hearing that there were two allegations of 1.f. and 1.g., so
only one of each was addressed. This debt was not reviewed at the hearing, but Exhibit
6 shows that Applicant is disputing this debt. Exhibit L, a credit report, dated August 24,
2009, shows that this debt has been deleted. 
1.f.(2) This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,195. This debt
was also not reviewed at the hearing, but Exhibit 6 shows that this debt was paid. 
1.g.(2) This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $444. Applicant
testified that she still owes this debt. She is in the process of making some kind of
payment arrangement with this creditor, although no agreement has yet been reached
(Tr at 49).
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,183. I find that this
is the same debt as 1.e., above, and it has been reviewed above. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,183. I find that this
is the same debt as 1.e. and 1.h., above, and it has been reviewed above. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $595. Applicant
testified that she has not made a payment on this debt, but she is disputing it (Tr at 51-
52). Exhibit 6 shows that this debt is still outstanding, but it does not show that it is
being disputed. I find that this debt is still owed. 
4
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,510. Applicant
testified that she has resolved this debt. After reviewing Exhibit 3, page 12, and Exhibit
H, this debt has been moved to different collection agencies, but it appears that it has
been resolved. 
1.l. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $565. Applicant
testified that she has not made a payment on this debt, but she is disputing it (Tr at 55-
56). Exhibit 6 shows that this debt is still outstanding, but it does not show that it is
being disputed. I find that this debt is still owed. 
1.m. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,578. Applicant
acknowledged that she owes this debt, but she has not yet made a payment
arrangement, although she expects the debt to be significantly reduced (Tr at 56-59). 
1.n. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,797. The credit
report dated August 5, 2009, shows that this debt has been resolved (Exhibit F).
1.o. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $9,259. I find that this
is the same debt as 1.a., above, and it has been reviewed above. 
1.q. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $503. The credit
report dated August 5, 2009, shows that this debt has been resolved (Exhibit F).
1.r. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $498. Applicant
testified that she had disputed this bill. Upon review, I find that this is the same debt as
1.g., above, and it has been reviewed. 
1.s. The SOR alleges that in May 2000, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
in the Unites States Bankruptcy Court. Applicant testified that she filed bankruptcy to
discharge all of her debts, except her home mortgage and an automobile loan, on both
of which she continued making payments. She had financial problems at that time,
because she went through a period when she was a full time student, as a result of
which she had to resign her employment and relocate (Tr at 63-64).
1.t. The SOR alleges that in October 2006, the petition, that Applicant filed for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in the Unites States Bankruptcy Court, was discharged. Applicant
testified that she only filed for that was alleged in 1.s., above. Based on the evidence
introduced at the hearing, which showed that the date of October 2006 was in error, the
SOR was amended to the correct date that Applicant’s debts were discharged in
bankruptcy, which was August 2000 not October 2006. 
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
2.a.  The SOR alleged that Applicant “did not list that [her] security clearance and
SCI access was (sic) revoked before been (sic) terminated from the U.S. Army on April
1, 1991.” The SOR does not identify where Applicant failed to list this information, but
the assumption is that it was in the SCA. 
5
Applicant testified that she did not believe her security clearance or SCI access
were terminated, because when she was completing her SCA, she had her security
manager run her background through the Government computer, and it returned a
response of “undetermined” regarding her security status. It is her belief that her
security clearance was never “revoked, terminated or suspended.”  (Tr at 67). I do not
find that the Government established that Applicant knowingly furnished false
information on the SCA, regarding her previous security clearance status.
2.b. The SOR listed this second allegation under Guideline 2 as also 2.a., so it
was amended to be 2.b. The SOR alleged that Applicant responded "No" to: Section 28:
a., of a Security Clearance Application (SCA) that Applicant executed on January 9,
2008 (Exhibit 1), which asks, “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days
delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant answered “No” to this question, and she failed to
list any debts. The SOR alleges that Applicant should have disclosed the debts listed as
1.a., through 1.t. Clearly 1.s. and 1.t. are not debts, so they should not have not been
disclosed, but at least some of Applicant’s debts should have been listed on the SCA, in
response to 28.a.
Applicant testified that at the time she completed the SCA. she had not reviewed
a credit report, so she was not aware what her financial status was regarding overdue
debts. Applicant submitted Exhibit J, which was her handwritten SCA. In response to
question 28:a., she initially wrote “Yes” and then it appears that she put a line through it
and answered “No”. When asked to list the names and addresses of creditors, she
wrote “unclear at this time unemployment and relocation.” Applicant stated that she
initially answered yes, but after she had a further discussion with her security manager,
she decided that “if [she] didn’t know, that [she] should go ahead and answer ‘No.’” (Tr
at 73).
Upon further questioning about why Applicant answered no to question 28.a.,
she could give no definitive reason for why she failed to identify on the SCA, at a
minimum, that she had overdue debts, even if she did not know all of them or to whom
they were owed (Tr at 92-94).  Applicant testified that she previously completed SCAs in
1983 and 1988. Based on her lack of an explanation for her failure to identify on her
SCA that she even had any overdue debts, and the fact that she had two previous
experiences competing security applications, I do not find Applicant credible that she did
not intend to mislead the Government in her response to Questions 28: a.
Also, while it was not alleged on the SOR, I have noted that Applicant responded
"No" to Section 28: b., of the SCA, which asks, “Are you currently over 90 days
delinquent on any debt(s)?" She also failed to list any debts. I find that Applicant should
have identified the same debts in response to this question. 
Applicant testified that after her debts were discharged in bankruptcy in 2000,
she “cleaned up her act” until 2004, when she incurred the majority of her debt. Her
mother became ill with cancer, and she resigned her job and moved to another state to
be with her. At that time she attempted to operate a landscape business, and it was not
as successful as Applicant had hoped it would be. Applicant was also in a domestic
6
partnership with another individual, and this led to financial difficulties including alleged
identity theft of Applicant’s credit cards by this person (Tr at 76-79). 
Applicant testified that currently she has sufficient income at the end of the month
to pay off the SOR debts that have not yet been resolved (Tr at 88-89), but no evidence
was submitted to establish the status of Applicant’s current financial situation. 
Two witnesses testified in very positive terms on behalf of Applicant, describing
Applicant as “patriotic” with “a very good character” (Tr at 26-38). Additionally, Applicant
submitted four letters, three from individuals who have known Applicant either in an
employment or personal capacity (Exhibits D and K). The three  letters were very
positive, describing Applicant as “caring and giving” and having “strong core values and
integrity.” The fourth letter was from the Facility Security Officer of Applicant’s current
employer, dated August 24, 2009, in which he stated that he felt that Applicant “did not
intentionally exclude information from her security clearance questionnaire. In speaking
with [Applicant] through the questionnaire process, she felt that all of her answers were
to the best of her knowledge at the time of submission.”
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
7
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government has established that Applicant has had a history of financial
difficulties and overdue debts.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶  19 (c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and has been
unable to pay her obligations for a considerable period of time. The evidence is
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted above,
Applicant’s financial problems were largely because of the illness of her mother, the lack
of success of her business, and the alleged identity theft by her former domestic
partner. She also has been responsible by making some attempts to resolve her
overdue debts. However, since Applicant has had a history of financial difficulties
including a bankruptcy in 2000 and accumulating significant debts thereafter, and there
was no  evidence introduced to establish that Applicant’s current fiances are stable, I
do not find that this potentially mitigating condition is sufficient to minimize the
Government’s concern with Applicant’s financial situation.  I resolve Guideline F against
Applicant.
8
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, I find that the Government has not established that
Applicant knowingly provided incorrect material information to the Government,
regarding her previous security clearance status.
However, I do not find that Applicant testified credibly that she did not knowingly
provide incorrect material information to the Government on the SCA regarding her
overdue debts. While I note the letter submitted by the Facility Security Officer (Exhibit
K), in which he indicated that he did not believe Applicant would intentionally exclude
information from her SCA, I find that Applicant clearly was aware that she had overdue
debts, and I can find no reasonable explanation for her failure to identify, in any way,
that she had debts that were overdue for more than 180 days. 
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E,  I conclude that DC15 (a) “deliberate
omission, concealment, of falsification of relevant material facts from any personnel
security questionnaire” applies against Applicant. I do not find that any MC applies
under this guideline.  I therefore, resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines F and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above regarding Applicant’s history of overdue debts,
and her failure to furnish accurate information about her debts, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.f, g, f(2), h, i, k, n, o, q, r: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a -.e, g,(2), j, l, m, s, t: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
