 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, dated January 1987, as amended
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 08-06837
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns that arise from her
longstanding financial problems and her failure to disclose her delinquent debts in a
Questionnaire For Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) she submitted in February 2008. 
On May 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing its trustworthiness concerns.  The SOR1
alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E
(personal conduct). On May 28, 2009, Applicant submitted her response to the SOR. She
admitted all SOR allegations except those contained in subparagraphs 1.f and 2.a. and she
requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2009. A notice of hearing was issued on
July 15, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 18, 2009. The hearing was conducted as
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
scheduled. The government submitted six documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-6 and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted nine documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant Exhibits
(AE) 1-9. Department Counsel’s objection to AE 1 was sustained. AE 2-9 were admitted
into the record without objection. The transcript was received on August 26, 2009.      
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 46-year-old woman who has been employed as a personal care
advocate by a defense contractor since October 2007. In the SF 85P she submitted on
February 2, 2008, she listed the following employment history: August 2007 to October
2007: temporary agency; March 2007 to July 2007: unemployment; December 2006 to
March 2007: unspecified employment; October to December 2006: customer service
representative; May 2003 to August 2006: customer service representative; April 2002 to
May 2003: receptionist; January 1999 to March 2002: receptionist; and August 1998 to
December 1999: receptionist through a temporary agency. She testified she is currently
working part-time as a home health aide in addition to her full-time employment with the
defense contractor (Tr. 39). Applicant submitted a number of certificates and other awards
that indicate she has been commended for her work performance on a number of
occasions. 
Applicant graduated from a vocational high school in June 1981, having completed
a course in cosmetology. She has been married since October 1988, although she and her
husband have frequently lived separate and apart, especially during the first ten years of
their marriage. Their most recent separation occurred in or about 2005/06. They are now
living together. They have two children, ages 25 and 19. Both children attend college. The
youngest child resides with Applicant and her husband.
Applicant testified she has suffered from bipolar disorder since 1984 (Tr. 47-48).
She also testified she was not properly medicated for the disorder from 1984 to 2006, and,
as a result, she made some unwise choices that contributed to her financial problems (Tr.
47-48).  
Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection in April 1999. She testified she and her
husband initially filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection but because of poor decisions
they had to convert it into a Chapter 7 bankruptcy (Tr. 59). They were awarded a Chapter
7 discharge in July 1999. Applicant was unable to recall how much debt was discharged
in the bankruptcy, However, before they filed for bankruptcy, she knows they had two
automobiles repossessed. 
The debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.c, 1.i, and 1.l are charge off and
collection accounts that resulted from deficiencies owing after the resale of additional
automobiles repossessed after Applicant was awarded the bankruptcy discharge in 1999.
Applicant credibly testified she has only had four vehicles repossessed, two before and two
 It is impossible to discern from the record evidence whether the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.i or2
1.l is a duplicate of the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.c. Accordingly, the larger of the two debts, alleged in
subparagraph 1.i, will be found for Applicant.  
3
after she filed for bankruptcy (Tr. 69-71).  The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.g, owing in2
the amount of $3,254, is also alleged as having arisen from an automobile repossession.
Applicant credibly testified that debt actually resulted from her daughter totaling an
automobile Applicant purchased in April 2008, and not from a fifth repossession (Tr. 75-
76).
SOR subparagraph 1.h alleges a collection account owing in the amount of $7,412.
SOR subparagraph 1.j alleges a charge off account owing in the amount of $1,968. Each
of these accounts has now resulted in judgments being entered against Applicant. The
creditor on the account alleged in subparagraph 1.j attached approximately $1,015 that
Applicant had in a bank account leaving about $800 still owing on the judgment. The
creditor alleged in subparagraph 1.h has not begun collection action on its judgment.    
Applicant testified the debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f arose from a former
landlord’s claim for cleaning charges after she vacated an apartment. She denies she owes
anything for cleaning the apartment because she properly cleaned it herself before she
moved. 
The remaining delinquent debts alleged in the SOR consist of eight accounts that
have been submitted for collection, owing in the combined amount of $2,695, and one
account that has been charged off in the amount of $448. Applicant admits she is
responsible for these accounts and that no payment has been made on any of them.
In addition to the bad decisions she claims to have made as a result of her bipolar
disorder, Applicant attributes her financial problems to marital separations, various periods
of unemployment she and her husband have experienced, reduced wages they have
earned after changing jobs due to layoffs, and medical assistance she had to provide to
her mother that caused her to take unpaid leave from work. She sought the assistance of
a debt service that did nothing other than submit disputes to credit reporting agencies in
an effort to get older accounts deleted from her credit reports.
Applicant does not having any funds in bank or retirement accounts. She has no
means to satisfy any of her delinquent accounts. She is contemplating once again seeking
bankruptcy protection. Meanwhile, she recently purchased a new automobile at a cost of
about $22,000. Her and her husband’s combined monthly automobile payments are about
$825. They also pay $317 per month for auto insurance. She testified she had to purchase
a new car instead of a used car because she did not have any cash available to pay for a
used car (Tr. 82).   
Applicant failed to disclose that she had debts that were over 180 days delinquent
in the SF 85P she submitted on February 2, 2008. She testified she filled the SF 85P out
between answering calls at work and didn’t realize she had answered the question
incorrectly (Tr. 91-92) However, in the SF 85P, Applicant listed a detailed work history,
  Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.3
  Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.4
 Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, dated5
November 19, 2004.
  Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  6
  Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865. 7
  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.8
  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.9
4
addresses and phone numbers for residence and work references dating back as far as
1998, and her reported last use of marijuana in 2007. 
POLICIES
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions.  3
The standard to be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the
person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.4
Trustworthiness adjudications apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security
Service and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor5
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any
final unfavorable access determination is made.6
An administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions
in the Adjudicative Guidelines when evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust
position. The administrative judge must also consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.”  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration,
and any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive information
will be resolved in favor of national security. Decisions are made in terms of the national
interest and are not determinations as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.7
The Government is required to present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR.  The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other8
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel.  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining9
a favorable trustworthiness decision. 
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection but had to have it converted to
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 1999. She was awarded a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge
in July 1999. She had two cars repossessed before she filed for bankruptcy and she had
two more cars repossessed since receiving the bankruptcy discharge. She has two
delinquent accounts that have recently resulted in judgments being entered against her.
The creditor on one of those judgments seized all the funds Applicant had in her bank
account to partially satisfy the judgment. The other judgment creditor has not begun
collection proceedings. Finally, Applicant has nine additional delinquent accounts, owing
in the combined amount of $3,143, that have either been submitted for collection or
charged off. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.
Applicant attributes her financial problems to periods of unemployment, decreased
income due to the change of jobs caused by layoffs, her bipolar disorder, marital
separations, and her need to take unpaid leave from work to care for her mother. However,
it cannot be said that she acted responsibly under the circumstances, as best evidenced
by the repeated repossession of automobiles and Applicant’s recent purchase of yet
another automobile that she obviously is not going to be able to afford and somehow make
an attempt to satisfy her delinquent creditors. Accordingly, Mitigating Condition (MC) 20(b):
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances does not apply.
The remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts of this case. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is
any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process
or any failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (Adjudicative Guideline
[AG] 15)
Applicant failed to disclose her many delinquent debts in the SF 85P she submitted
in February 2008. Her explanation that the omission was inadvertent because she filled out
the SF 85P between telephone calls while working is not credible considering the detailed
information she provided in that SF 85P about her employment history, residential and job
references, and her last reported use of marijuana. DC 16(a): deliberate omission,
6
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personal security questionnaire,
personal history statement, of similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities applies. No mitigating condition
applies.
 
The objective of a trustworthiness determination is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to sensitive information.
The “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of her acts
and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration
all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful
analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. She has not overcome
the case against her or satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.g-h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.j-q: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion  
             
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position.
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

