1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )     ISCR Case No. 08-06320
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant smoked marijuana, with varying frequency up to twice a month at
times, from age 17 to July 1993, again twice in about 2000, and once during the last
quarter of 2007. Applicant does not intend to use any illegal drug in the future, and he is
not likely to jeopardize his job by using drugs. Personal conduct concerns that arise
because of his deliberate omission of drug involvement from his February 2002 SF 86
are not mitigated. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on November 26, 2007. On February 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H and Guideline E that provided the basis for its
preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Before the introduction of any evidence at the hearing, I corrected a typographical error in my order1
of June 11, 2009, to clarify that the SOR had been amended to add a new allegation 2.d (which was the
subject of the original motion to amend) and not  2.e.
Both the Motion to Amend and the Amended Motion to Amend contain incorrect social security2
numbers for the Applicant. 
2
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense as of September 1,
2006. 
Applicant received the SOR on February 10, 2009, and he submitted an undated
answer in which he requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was
assigned to me on April 2, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him. On June 2, 2009, I
scheduled a hearing for June 17, 2009.
On June 10, 2009, Department Counsel filed an Amended Motion to Amend the
SOR, referencing a Motion to Amend dated March 20, 2009, which was provided to me
for the first time on June 11, 2009. After considering the respective positions of the
parties, I granted the amended motion in part, infra.1
The hearing was held as scheduled. The government submitted five exhibits (Ex.
1-5), which were entered into evidence without any objections, and offered the
testimony of a government investigator. Applicant submitted one exhibit (Ex. A), also
entered with no objections, and he and three witnesses testified on his behalf. A
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on June 29, 2009.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
On March 20, 2009, the government forwarded a Motion to Amend the SOR to
Applicant, seeking to add a new allegation 2.d under Guideline E to allege that he
falsified his February 2002 security clearance application (SF 86) by not disclosing that
he had used marijuana on at least two occasions in about 1999 or 2000. The motion
was not included in the file forwarded to me on April 2, 2009.
Before the hearing was formally scheduled, but after Applicant was provided
through discovery with a copy of the motion, the case was transferred to the presently
assigned Department Counsel. She moved on June 10, 2009, in an Amended Motion to
Amend,  to change proposed allegation 2.d, which was the subject of the original2
motion, to indicate that Applicant deliberately did not disclose that he had used
marijuana “on at least two occasions in about 2000.” Furthermore, Department Counsel
sought to add two new Guideline E security concerns (2.e and 2.f) to allege that
Applicant also falsified his February 2002 SF 86 and his November 2007 e-QIP by
deliberately failing to disclose his July 1993 arrest for possession of marijuana.
Applicant through his attorney objected to the Amended Motion to Amend citing the lack
The November 26, 2007, security clearance application was referred to as a Questionnaire for3
National Security Positions (Standard Form 86) in SOR 2.c. The QNSP is a form included within the e-QIP.
3
of reasonable notice,  given the hearing was to be held within the week and the
government was not relying on newly discovered information. Applicant’s counsel
conceded on June 11, 2009, that Applicant had not been prejudiced in his ability to
respond to the original motion concerning SOR 2.d.
On June 11, 2009, Department Counsel provided me with a copy of the original
Motion to Amend and Applicant’s objections. After considering the parties’ respective
positions, I granted the amended motion to the extent that 2.d, as newly drafted,
clarified the concern that had been the subject of the March 20, 2009, motion of which
Applicant had adequate notice. Accordingly, the SOR was amended to add a new
subparagraph 2.d under Guideline E, as follows:
2.d. You falsified material facts on a Security Clearance Application,
Standard Form 86, signed by you on February 6, 2002, in response to
Question 27 which asks “Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years,
whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for
example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium,
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogens (LSD,
PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?.” You answered “no” and deliberately
failed to disclose that you had used marijuana on at least two occasions in
about 2000.
Applicant’s objections were sustained as to proposed SOR 2.e and 2.f. The government
possessed the documents upon which the allegations were based as of March 20,
2009, if not when the SOR was issued on February 3, 2009. Previously assigned
Department Counsel reviewed the documents, and with discovery to Applicant, filed a
motion to amend which could have included allegations similar to proposed 2.e and 2.f
but did not. Transfer of the case to a government counsel who views the evidence
differently is not good cause to add new allegations at the eleventh hour.
Findings of Fact
In the SOR as amended, DOHA alleged under Guideline H, drug involvement,
that Applicant used marijuana from about 1989 to 1993 and from 2000 to at least after
about November 2007 (SOR 1.a), including after he had been granted a security
clearance in about February 2002 and after he had submitted his security clearance
application  on November 26, 2007 (SOR 1.d); that he purchased marijuana (SOR 1.b);3
and that he was arrested in July 1992 for possession of marijuana and possession of
fireworks and fined (SOR 1.c). Under Guideline E, personal conduct, Applicant was
alleged to have used marijuana after he had been granted a clearance in about
February 2002 (SOR 2.a) and after he had submitted his security clearance application
on November 26, 2007 (SOR 2.b); to have falsified his November 2007 application by
4
responding “no” to the illegal drug inquiry in question 24.a (SOR 2.c), and as noted
above, to have also falsified his February 2002 security clearance application by
responding “no” to the drug inquiry and not disclosing that he had used marijuana on at
least two occasions in about 2000 (SOR 2.d).
Applicant admitted that he had used marijuana, but only from 1989 to 1993. He
also admitted the purchase of marijuana and his arrest in 1993. He denied any
involvement with marijuana after he had been issued his security clearance in February
2002 or after he had completed his latest e-QIP in November 2007. Applicant also
denied the falsification allegations. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and
transcript, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 36-year-old rigger who has worked for a defense contractor since
March 2002 (Ex. 1). He had previously served on active duty in the U.S. military from
April 1994 to September 2000, and held a secret-level security clearance (Ex. 1, Tr.
125). That clearance was restored to him in about February 2002 for his duties with his
current employer (Ex. 1, Tr. 126).
Applicant began using marijuana in about 1989 when he was 17 years old. He
smoked it twice a month at times, some months not at all, until July 1993 (Ex. 4, Tr.
128-29), when during a traffic stop, he was arrested for possession of marijuana on his
person and illegal fireworks in his vehicle (Tr. 115). He submitted a urinalysis sample at
the station which was positive for marijuana (Ex. 4). He was charged only with
possession of marijuana and illegal fireworks (Ex. 5). On the advice of his attorney, he
submitted to weekly drug screens at a local clinic for three months and obtained
counseling. In October 1993, he was sentenced to a six month diversion program, six
months license suspension, and a fine. He paid his fines, and completed the screening
program. In April 1994, the charges were dismissed (Ex. 5). He understood from the
judge that the offense was expunged and would not be on his record (Ex. 4, Tr. 117,
119). Applicant stopped using marijuana after his arrest because he planned to enter
the U.S. military (Ex. 4).
Applicant discussed his 1993 arrest with his military recruiter, but he did not
mention his use of marijuana in high school (Tr. 146). In March 1994, he was accepted
for enlistment under a delayed enlistment program (Ex. 4, Tr. 120). He completed a
security clearance application (National Agency Questionnaire) on March 4, 1994. He
disclosed the 1993 drug charge in response to question 19 concerning any arrests.
Applicant also checked “Yes” in response to question 20.a concerning whether he had
ever used or possessed any controlled drug except as prescribed by a licensed
physician, and added under the remarks section that he had smoked marijuana one
time in July 1993 (“experiment use”) and did not intend to use marijuana in the future
Applicant now denies that he wrote “one-time” use of marijuana on his NAQ (Tr. 151). He was either4
unable or unwilling to indicate who had indicated that he used marijuana only once (“I would have to guess
that either my recruiter or someone at the MEPS office in New York wrote that.”) (Tr. 151-52). Even assuming
that it was in his recruiter’s handwriting, it is reasonable to assume that the recruiter wrote what Applicant told
him. Furthermore, Applicant signed the form certifying that his responses were accurate to the best of his
knowledge and belief.
5
(Ex. 2).  Applicant was granted a secret clearance for his duties in about July 1994 (Ex.4
1).
Applicant abstained from illicit substance use for the duration of his active duty
service. He received the National Defense Service Medal, two Meritorious Unit
Commendations, the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, Second Good Conduct
Award, and deployment ribbon for his service (Ex. 4). In April 2000, he and his spouse
married (Ex. 1). They had a son in August 2000, and in September 2000, Applicant was
honorably discharged from active duty into the reserves (Ex. 4).
After a few months of unemployment, Applicant worked as a calibration
technician for a local company until March 2002, when he started with his present
employer. Before he reported for work with the defense contractor, he executed a
security clearance application (SF 86) on February 6, 2002. He responded “No” to
question 27 concerning any illegal use of a controlled substance since age 16 or in the
last 7 years. He also answered “No” to question 24 concerning whether he had ever
been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs. He was
granted a secret clearance for his duties (Ex. 1).
In conjunction with a periodic reinvestigation of his security clearance, Applicant
executed an e-QIP on November 26, 2007. He answered “No” to question 23.d
regarding whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense related to
alcohol or drugs. He also answered “No” to question 24.a concerning the illegal use of a
controlled substance, including marijuana, since the age of 16 or in the last seven
years, whichever was shorter (Ex. 1).
On February 1, 2008, Applicant was interviewed by a contract investigator for the
U.S. government about the unlisted charges of possession of marijuana and illegal
fireworks in 1993. The investigator took notes during the interview, which she then read
back to Applicant to confirm their accuracy (Tr. 42, 131). After the interview, she
generated a written report based on those notes (Tr. 33-35, 43). The investigator
reported that Applicant had told her that he had not disclosed his 1993 arrest for
marijuana possession “on his case papers” because he had been told by the judge that
he would not have a record after he completed the drug screening program and paid his
fines. She also reported that Applicant had detailed marijuana use from age 17 twice
monthly until his arrest in July 1993, that he had quit smoking marijuana due to his
upcoming entry into the Navy, but also that he had used marijuana three times after he
was discharged from the military: twice when he first got out, and once four months ago
with an old friend named Pat. The investigator further reported, “SUBJECT
ANSWERED ‘NO’ TO USING MARIJUANA WHILE POSSESSING A SECURITY
6
CLEARANCE IN THE LAST SEVEN YEARS ON HIS CASE PAPERS DUE TO
SUBJECT USED THE MARIJUANA AFTER COMPLETING THE CASE PAPERS” (all
capitals in original). Applicant denied any intent to use marijuana in the future (Ex. 4). 
In September 2008, Applicant was asked by DOHA to review the report of his
February 2008 subject interview and to verify its accuracy. On September 29, 2008,
Applicant indicated that the report of investigation did not accurately reflect the
information he had provided to the investigator. He explained that he had omitted his
1993 arrest because he did not think he had a record, as the judge had indicated that
offense would be expunged. Citing his defense contractor employment and family
responsibilities, he maintained he had no room for alcohol or drugs in his life. With
regard to illegal drug involvement, he submitted the following corrections:
Subject may have smoked marijuana twice monthly, some months not at
all from age 17 until 07/93 incident.
Subject bought marijuana three times in dime bag form, and/or 1/8 ounce
package before 07/93 incident.
Subject last drove after smoking marijuana at time of incident 07/93 and
does feel effects of driving.
(Ex. 4). Nowhere in his response to DOHA interrogatories did Applicant specifically
challenge the accuracy of the investigator’s report concerning admissions by him of
marijuana use in 1999 or 2000 and in 2007. And he did not challenge that he had
omitted his most recent use of marijuana from his November 2007 e-QIP because it
happened after he completed his security clearance application.
When he responded to the SOR, and at his hearing, Applicant denied that he had
used any marijuana after his arrest in July 1993 (Tr. 129, 136, 138, 141), and he
attributed any reference to him using marijuana after 1993 to an “inaccurate timeline of
events on the investigation report.” (Tr. 130).  He admitted that he used marijuana in
high school, but on a random basis, once in awhile (Tr. 145). When asked why he had
listed only that he had used marijuana once in July 1993 on his 1994 NAQ, Applicant
responded that the statement was not in his handwriting and it was 16 years ago (Tr.
157). Applicant denied ever telling the investigator that he had omitted his marijuana
use from his November 2007 e-QIP because it happened after he had completed the
form (Tr. 192). He attributed his failure to correct that claimed inaccuracy to not being
thorough enough (Tr. 195). Applicant testified he had not raised the issue of any
inaccuracies in the investigator’s report with the investigator because he didn’t have any
way of contacting her (Tr. 196). He does not recall receiving a business card from the
investigator (Tr. 200).
For her part, the investigator was unable to recall her interview with Applicant (Tr.
31, 35). She testified that the report of her interview with Applicant was written in her
“usual style” (Tr. 32, 38). She described her normal procedure in conducting the
7
interview, asking questions according to a prescribed format (Tr. 38), taking notes on
what was said to her, reviewing the notes with the subject of the interview (Tr. 34, 42),
leaving a business card with her name with the subject (Tr. 44), and following the
interview,  typing up a report directly with no deviation from the notes taken during the
interview (Tr. 34-35). There is no indication that the investigator had any motive to
report other than what Applicant told her or to indicate inadvertent error in her reporting
the substance of her interview with Applicant. Applicant’s denials of any drug abuse
after July 1993 are less credible.
Applicant has been an excellent worker for the defense contractor (Ex. A). His
general foreman and his direct supervisor have no complaints about his professionalism
or dedication to his duties. He sets an example for his peers (Tr. 69) and is considered
a “valuable asset” (Tr. 85, 88). Applicant informed his direct supervisor that the
government has raised allegations of marijuana use by him in the present decade but
that there is no truth to the allegations (Tr. 93). Applicant wants to retain his
employment which he understands he will lose if his clearance is not maintained (Tr.
190).
Applicant coaches youth sports (soccer, basketball) in his local community. He is
also involved with scouting (Tr. 98-102, 143). A neighbor who has known him for the
past six or seven years was given the impression that the information of security
concern related to a 1993 incident which “got dated as if it was today and that wasn’t
the case.” (Tr. 109). 
Applicant does not currently associate with any known drug users. He does not
intend to use any illegal drug in the future (Tr. 184, 189).
Policies
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior,
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative
process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
8
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the
government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access
to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The security concern about drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: “Use of an
illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.” Applicant admits that he smoked marijuana from age 17 until his arrest in
July 1993 for illegal possession. AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies.  He also admits
that he purchased marijuana on three occasions up to July 1993, so AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal
drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” also applies.
Applicant denies any use of marijuana after his arrest in July 1993. However,
representations of more recent drug use, made by him during his subject interview of
February 2008, are considered more credible than his claim that the investigator
somehow erred in reporting the time line of his drug use. As reflected in Exhibit 4, a
contract investigator for the government reported that Applicant told her he smoked
marijuana twice shortly after his discharge from the military and once about four months
before his February 2008 interview. Any use of marijuana by him during the last quarter
9
of 2007 would have occurred while he was a defense contractor employee with a secret
clearance (see AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security
clearance”). While the investigator could not recall her interview of Applicant, she
recognized the report of interview as written by her in her usual style. She testified
about required procedures, including that notes taken during questioning are reviewed
with the interviewee, and that a report is then prepared from those notes. Applicant
acknowledged that the investigator read her notes back to him, albeit he claims “very
briefly” (Tr. 131). Since the investigator was required to type the report herself from the
notes (Tr. 46), confusion or misunderstanding is less likely. The investigator had no
motive to misrepresent what Applicant told her. Applicant had an opportunity to review
the investigator’s report in September 2008. His correction, that he “may have smoked
marijuana twice monthly, some months not at all from age 17 until 07/93 incident,” is not
a clear denial of any drug use after July 1993. Furthermore, his explanation for not
listing his marijuana use on his November 2007 e-QIP (that it had not yet happened)
implies that he had used marijuana within months of his interview and after completion
of his e-QIP. Most importantly, he agreed with, and adopted, the investigator’s summary
without clarifying or denying the statement that he omitted his marijuana use from his e-
QIP because it occurred after he completed the form. 
It is difficult to conclude that Applicant acted in good faith in light of his history of
incomplete disclosure about his marijuana involvement, including on his 1994 NAQ, and
his minimization of his drug abuse at his hearing. He told the investigator he used
marijuana twice monthly. In September 2008, he told DOHA that he “may have smoked
marijuana twice monthly, some months not at all” before his arrest. When asked at his
hearing about his marijuana use in high school, he testified, that it was random, once in
awhile (Tr. 145),  and he denied any use of marijuana after 1993. AG ¶ 25(g) applies
because of his use of marijuana in 2007. It is unclear whether he held a security
clearance when he abused the marijuana shortly after his discharge from the Navy. He
was unemployed from his discharge in September 2000 to March 2001 and then
worked as a calibration technician in the civilian sector until March 2002.
Given the evidence of relatively recent marijuana involvement in 2007 after he
had abstained since about 2000, AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was
so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,”
does not apply in mitigation. But AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any
drugs in the future,” applies. Applicant is no longer associating with drug users (AG ¶
26(b)(1), “disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts”). While he has not
executed the signed statement required under AG ¶ 26(b)(4), “a signed statement of
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation,” he has expressed a
credible intent to abstain from future illegal drug use. There is nothing about his present
activities involving his son and family that is conducive to drug use and he is not likely to
risk his employment by using marijuana in the future. There is no evidence that he
sought out marijuana on the very limited occasions that he used it after he was
discharged from active duty. His involvement with marijuana while he held a security
10
clearance is not condoned, but it also appears to be an aberration in an otherwise
stable, law-abiding lifestyle. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern about personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
DOHA alleged personal conduct concerns because Applicant smoked marijuana
after he had been granted a security clearance in 2002 (SOR 2.a) and after he had
submitted his e-QIP on November 26, 2007 (SOR 2.b). Applicant told a government
investigator that he used marijuana four months before his February 1, 2008, interview.
He also told the investigator that he had not listed this marijuana use on his e-QIP
because it occurred after he completed the e-QIP, which would have been only a couple
of months before his interview. If Applicant smoked marijuana after he submitted his
November 2007 e-QIP (SOR 2.b), then he could not have falsified his November 2007
e-QIP by failing to disclose that abuse (SOR 2.c). It is more likely that the four months
was an estimate, and that he last smoked marijuana after he completed his November
2007 e-QIP.  Applicant displayed poor judgment within the general concerns underlying
Guideline E when he used marijuana while he held a security clearance, and after he
completed his November 2007 e-QIP, but those concerns are more appropriately
addressed under Guideline H, supra.
The government did not establish that Applicant falsified his November 2007 e-
QIP by failing to disclose illegal drug use in the preceding seven years (SOR 2.c).
Applicant reported to the investigator that he stopped smoking marijuana after his arrest
in July 1993 due to his intended enlistment in the military. He reported using marijuana
three times after his discharge, which he recalled to be in 1999 or 2000, including just
after he was separated from active duty. Records of his discharge from active duty (Ex.
4) show he was discharged on September 19, 2000. His marijuana use could have
occurred after his discharge but before late November 2000, and it would have been
outside of the seven-year scope of question 24.a on the November 26, 2007. Yet, that
use would clearly have fallen within the time frame covered by the drug inquiry on his
February 6, 2002, SF 86 (SOR 2.d). Applicant responded “NO” to question 27, “Since
the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any
controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish,
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or
prescription drugs?” His failure to report his abuse of marijuana in 2000 on his February
2002 SF 86 is reasonably inferred to have been knowing and deliberate. The security
11
concerns under AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities,” are established.
None of the mitigating conditions apply. The evidence shows Applicant has a
history of misrepresentation concerning his illegal drug involvement which extends to
the present. When he completed his NAQ for his first clearance in March 1994, he
responded “Yes” to question 20 concerning whether he had ever tried, used, or
possessed any narcotic, depressant, hallucinogen, or cannabis, but indicated only the
use one-time in July 1993 on the occasion of his arrest. He did not disclose on the form
that he had smoked marijuana in high school. This drug abuse was recent and should
have been reported. Even if that particular statement was not in his handwriting, he
signed the form certifying that his response to the drug inquiry was accurate when it
was not. Applicant admitted at his hearing that he had not informed his military recruiter
about his use of marijuana in high school, which lends credence to a finding of
deliberate concealment as well on the NAQ. Applicant subsequently falsified his
February 2002 SF 86 by denying any illegal drug use in the last seven years as alleged
in SOR 2.d. As noted, the evidence does not conclusively establish that he falsified his
November 2007 e-QIP, but he was not candid when he responded to the SOR or at his
hearing about his drug involvement after July 1993. His failure to provide a candid
statement at his hearing concerning his drug use casts “doubt on [his] reliability,
trustworthiness, and good judgment.”
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed
at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
12
Applicant’s use of marijuana in high school is attributed to his immaturity and
peer pressure. His abuse of marijuana on three occasions since September 2000, most
recently during the last quarter of 2007, casts doubt about his personal judgment.
However, his drug abuse was situational and not characteristic of his lifestyle, which has
revolved around his son’s activities (scouting, youth sports) and work as an
accomplished rigger. Personal conduct concerns persist because of his ongoing lack of
candor about his history of illegal drug involvement.  Applicant was not completely
forthcoming about his drug abuse when he first applied for a security clearance for his
work with his present employer. The ameliorative impact of his disclosures during his
February 2008 interview have been undermined by recent retractions of his previous
admissions. While his illegal drug use is not likely to recur, I am not persuaded that
Applicant has been “railroaded” because of “something that happened to [him] in ‘93"
(i.e., the illegal marijuana possession offense) (see Tr. 145). It is more likely that
Applicant, fearing that his disclosure of recent drug use could cost him his clearance,
put his personal desire to keep his job ahead of his fiduciary obligation to the
government. The government must be able to fully rely on the representations of those
persons granted access to classified information, and Applicant has created
considerable doubts about his trustworthiness. While his work record is commendable,
it is insufficient to overcome the concerns generated by his lack of candor.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
13
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
ELIZABETH M. MATCHINSKI
Administrative Judge
