1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-06605
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Erick M. Ferran, Esquire
September 18, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On October 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
H and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on November 12, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
March 16, 2009. DOHA initially issued a Notice of Hearing on March 30, 2009, and the
hearing was scheduled on April 28, 2009. As a result of the attorneys’ request, the
hearing was continued. A second Notice of Hearing was issued on April 22, 2009, and
the hearing convened, as scheduled on June 2, 2009, in Las Vegas Nevada.  
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without
objection. Two witnesses testified on behalf of the Government. Applicant testified on
2
his own behalf, and he submitted Exhibits A through P, which were admitted without
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on June 10, 2009. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant
and the other witnesses, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the
following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 34 years old. He is not married, and he has one child. He has
received two years of college education. He served in the United States Marines Corps
(USMC) from 1998 to 2006. Applicant works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
The testimony of two witnesses and the Applicant will be reviewed, before it is
applied to the SOR allegations. Two witnesses from the Marine Corps testified, at the
request of Department Counsel, to explain and give insights to the methods used by the
Marine Corps to administer drug testing, in general, and to provide any specific
information available, regarding the specific results of drug tests taken by Applicant,
when he was in the Marines. 
Witness 1
The first witness identified himself as a 25 year old, active duty sergeant, who
has been in the Marine Corps for almost six years. Part of the duties of Witness 1 for
almost the last 3 years included being the substance abuse control officer (SACO), for
which he indicated that had been thoroughly trained. His duties included conducting
urinalysis tests every month, and he estimated that he has conducted “a couple
hundred tests” (Tr at 28). Witness 1 testified, not as to the specifics of the tests received
by Applicant while in the Marines, but rather to explain the techniques used consistently
by all Marines, and to interpret the results of tests taken by Applicant, which were
entered into evidence.
Witness 1 testified as to the procedures used to test each Marine throughout the
Marine Corps, for potential drug usage, which are always the same and are extremely
thorough and careful, to make certain that no errors are made in the process (Tr at 36-
38). He thereafter explained the results of several of the documents that were identified
and entered into evidence as Exhibit 4. The first document reviewed by Witness 1 was
from the Naval Drug Screening Lab, which identified all drugs that are tested and the
amount necessary to be found in the blood stream to be tested positive or the Cutoff
Value (Tr at 33-34).  A second document was the “Results Report for USMC.” This
report identified that Applicant tested positive for THC (Marijuana) in the amount of 28
nanograms per millileter (npl) in February 2006. Since 15 npl is the minimum amount
required to test positive (Cutoff Value), the amount identified in Applicant was almost
two times that amount. In a second “Results Report for USMC” Applicant tested positive
3
for MDMA (Ecstacy) in the amount of 1542 nanograms in September 2005. Since 500
nanograms is the Cutoff Value, the amount identified in Applicant was more than three
times that amount. 
Finally, Witness 1 testified that, as the SACO officer, it is his duty to notify the
Officer in Charge if there are positive results on drug tests, but since he was not the
SACO when the tests were performed on Applicant, he could not testify whether or not
that procedure was carried out (Tr at 67).
Witness 2
Witness 2 identified himself as a staff sergeant, who has been in the Marine
Corps for eight years, and whose occupational specialty is as an administrative
personnel chief, where he performs human resources functions.  He testified that a
review of Applicant’s military records showed he received a urinalysis on his last drill
weekend, prior to his medical discharge from the Marines (Tr at 91-93). He further
stated that when Marines tested positive on drug tests, the rest of the troop was
sometimes made aware of the results of the test, although he was not certain if that was
the proper Marine policy (Tr at 112). 
Witness 2 also testified that he was the observer who was present during
Applicant’s urinalyses, making sure that Applicant properly provided the urine for each
test and returned it to the SACO without any contamination or error (Tr at 113-114). 
Applicant
As stated above, Applicant served for 6 years in the Marines. He was deployed in
Iraq and ultimately received a medical honorable discharge, because of an injury he
sustained to his L5-S1 disk from driving a LVS vehicle for long periods of time while in
Iraq (Tr at 161-162). Despite his medical discharge, Applicant did testify that for his
current employment, he has certain physical requirements. He has to be able to run
three miles in 22 minutes, but he stated that he runs it in 16 minutes. He also has had to
perform 20 or 30 push-ups and 60 sit-ups in two minutes (Tr at 149). For an individual,
who had to leave the Marines because of a disability, to perform in this clearly superior
physical manner, seems rather unlikely, particularly since Applicant contends that he
experiences constant pain from his injury and received a subsequent surgery. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that his disability was rated as 50% (Tr at 194).
However, a letter, dated January 26, 2006, from the Inspector/Officer in Charge
regarding Applicant’s “Discharge From the United States Marine Corps Reserve With
Severance Pay” clearly contradicts Applicant’s assertion (Exhibit A) . It indicates that
Applicant’s “disability is rated at ten percent.”
Applicant testified that he has been employed by his current employer for five
years, and during that time he has undergone two saliva drug tests, and he has never
been informed of any positive drug results (Tr at 148-149). No evidence was introduced
regarding the results of drug tests from his current employer. 
4
Applicant testified that he used marijuana when he was 17, but he did not use it
again after that time (Tr at 171). When he competed the Security Clearance Application
(SCA), he answered “No" to question 24, indicating that he had not used any illegal
substance in the last seven years, and at the hearing, he testified that he was being
honest when he furnished this answer. He also averred that he was not aware when he
completed the SCA, that he had received two positive drug tests (Tr at 174-175).
Applicant did concede that he had heard from a few former fellow Marines that
he had tested positive for drugs, and while he claimed that he thought it must be a joke,
he stated that he called his former first sergeant, who informed him that he was not
aware of Applicant testing positive (Tr at 181-184). Finally, Applicant claimed that he
had been present where marijuana was being used, on the day before the test, and he
posited a theory indicating that may have been why he tested positive for marijuana.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The SOR originally listed one allegation regarding illegal drug involvement under
Adjudicative Guideline H (1.a.). As a result of the Government’s Motion to Amend the
SOR, an additional allegation (1.b.) was added under Guideline H:
1.a. The SOR alleges that in February 2006, Applicant tested positive for
marijuana on a mandatory United State Marine Corps (USMC) drug test.  Exhibit 4 and
the testimony of Witnesses 1 and 2 clearly establish that Applicant tested positive on
February 12, 2006, for THC (marijuana) in the amount of 28 npm, which is almost twice
the cutoff value of 15 npm. Although Applicant denied ever using marijuana while he
was in the Marines, I find the methods and techniques of the drug tests administered  by
the Marines, including the chain of custody, as explained by Witnesses 1 and 2, to be
extremely reliable and accurate, and far more credible and persuasive than Applicant’s
testimony and his ultimate denial of drug usage. Therefore, I conclude that Applicant did
use the marijuana for which he tested positive. 
1.b. The SOR alleges that “In or around September of 2005, Applicant used
MDMA (Ecstasy).”  Exhibit 4 and the testimony of Witnesses 1 and 2 also clearly
establish that Applicant tested positive on September 11, 2005, for MDMA (Ecstacy) in
the amount of 1542 npm, which is more than three times the cutoff value of 500 npm.
Applicant also denied ever using MDMA while he was in the Marines. However, again, I
find the methods and techniques of the drug tests administered  by the Marines, to be
extremely reliable and accurate, and far more credible and persuasive than Applicant’s
denial. I also conclude that Applicant used the MDMA for which he tested positive. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline) E - Personal Conduct)
The SOR originally listed 1 allegation (2.a.) under Adjudicative Guideline E. As a
result of the Government’s Motion to Amend the SOR, two additional allegations were
added under Guideline H (2.b. and 2.c.):
5
2.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified material facts on a SCA, which he
executed on April 11, 2006 (Exhibit 1). Question #24 a. of the SCA asked since the age
of 16 or in the previous seven years, whichever is shorter, had Applicant illegally used
any controlled substance? The Government alleges that Applicant should have
disclosed that he tested positive for marijuana in February 2006. I do not find that the
question, as it is worded, calls for an answer that would disclose that Applicant tested
positive for any drug. However, since I have found that the drug test that Applicant
underwent was accurate, and he did use marijuana in 2006, then Applicant had the duty
to inform the Government of his marijuana usage on the SCA, which he failed to do.
2.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified material facts on the SCA (Exhibit
1), in that Applicant should have disclosed, in response to Question 24 a., that he used
MDMA (Ecstasy) in September 2005. Since I have also found that Applicant used
MDMA in 2005, then Applicant had the duty to inform the Government of this drug
usage on the SCA, which he also failed to do.
2.c. The SOR alleges that while Applicant was a “member of the USMC reserves,
[n he] wrongfully used a controlled substance on at least two separate occasions.” As
reviewed above, I find that Applicant did use a controlled substance on at least two
separate occasions as a USMC Reserve, which exhibited questionable judgement.
Paragraph 3 (Guideline J- Criminal Conduct)
The SOR originally did not list any allegation under Adjudicative Guideline J. As a
result of the Government’s Motion to Amend the SOR, two allegations were added
under Guideline J (3.a. and 3.b.). The Government alleges in this paragraph that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in criminal conduct: 
3.a. The SOR alleges that “In or around February of 2006 [Applicant] used
Marijuana.” I find that Applicant’s marijuana usage constitutes criminal conduct.  
3.b. The SOR alleges that “In or around September of 2005 [Applicant] used
MDMA (Ecstasy).” I also find that Applicant’s MDMA usage constitutes criminal conduct.
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a number of documents in an attempt to mitigate the
allegations in the SOR. Exhibits A through D detail the record of Applicant’s Marine
service and confirm that he did receive an Honorable Discharge. Exhibit A specifically
showed that Applicant received a discharge by reason of physical disability. His total
active service was 1 year 7 months, and his reserve time was 5 years 7 months, and as
reviewed above, his disability was rated as ten percent. Applicant also offered into
evidence eight character letters from individuals, who know or have known him in his
professional or private life, and many who consider him a friend (Exhibits F through M).
These letters were extremely laudatory in describing Applicant’s high integrity, reliability,
and good judgement. 
6
Applicant also introduced three different articles about drug tests and their
accuracy. The first was by a criminal defense lawyer to the National Association of
Criminal Defense Lawyers (Exhibit N), the second was titled “Investigation of
Interference by Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs in Urine Tests for Abused Drugs”
(Exhibit O), and the third was “Urine Drug Screening: Practical Guide for Clinicians”
(Exhibit P). All of these articles analyzed different aspects of drug tests, including their
flaws and whether they should be allowed into evidence. I reviewed them in great detail.
However none of the objections to drug testing, discussed in these articles, convince
me that the drug tests used in this case were not applicable, relevant or accurate.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
7
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, including the possession and use of
marijuana and MDMA, is of concern, especially in light of his desire to have access to
the nation's secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse
falls within Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DC) 25. (a) (any drug abuse) and
(b) (testing positive for illegal drug use).
Based on the Applicant’s lack of candor in the information about his drug
involvement that he furnished to the Government, I cannot conclude at this time that
Applicant’s conduct comes within any Mitigating Condition (MC). Accordingly,
Paragraph 1, Guideline H, of the SOR is concluded against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant executed a
SCA on April 11, 2006, in which he failed to identify that he had used marijuana or
MDMA.  
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual intentionally falsifies material
facts or fails to furnish relevant information to a Government investigator, it is extremely
difficult to conclude that he nevertheless possesses the judgment, and honesty
necessary for an individual given a clearance. In this case, I conclude that Applicant
knowingly and willingly failed to give complete, honest answers regarding his drug
usage to the Government.
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline E, I conclude that
DC 16. (a) applies because of Applicant’s deliberate omission, concealment, and
falsification of relevant facts from a personnel security questionnaire, which was used to
determine security clearance eligibility. I cannot find that any Mitigating Condition (MC)
applies in this paragraph.  
Applicant’s conduct, considered as a whole, exhibits questionable judgement,
unreliability, and a lack of candor. I resolve Paragraph 2, Guideline E, against Applicant.
8
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The Government also established that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct, by
using illegal substances while in the USMC. Additionally, while it is not alleged in the
SOR, Applicant’s knowingly providing false and misleading information to the
Government on a SCA is also a criminal act, although it will not be considered adversely
to the Applicant under this guideline. 
DC 31. (a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, applies in this
case. DC 31. (c), allegations or admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether
the person was formally charged, is also applicable to this case. While MC 32. (a) could
be argued to apply under Criminal Conduct, because so much time has allegedly
elapsed sine the criminal conduct. However, since Applicant has not acknowledged his
conduct, I do not find that this condition mitigates this concern. Paragraph 3, Guideline J
is found against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines H, E, and J, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply
and the Mitigating Conditions do not, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns set forth in this SOR. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
