                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-09913 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On March 1, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 2, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 15, 2009, Department 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine Items, and he 
mailed Applicant a complete copy the following day. Applicant received the FORM on 
July 22, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted a statement on August 20, 2009. Department Counsel 
had no objection to the document, which I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1 and 
admitted into the record. On September 3, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in 
Paragraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e of the SOR. He denied the allegations contained in 
Paragraphs 1.c and 1.d. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and married. From September 1984 to October 2004, 
he served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force. He was a technical sergeant at the time 
of his retirement. He has held a Top Secret security clearance from 1985 to the present.  
Since retiring from the Air Force in October 2004, he has worked as a senior network 
engineer for a defense contractor.  (AE 1) 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts accrued between 2002 and 2006. He attributes 
them to several factors: a remote year-long tour to Korea, another five-month 
deployment, a decrease in his housing allowance, and his wife’s failure to properly 
manage their money while he was gone. In October 2007, he was in a motorcycle 
accident and then placed on a short term disability, further diminishing his income. (AE 
1)  
  
 In February 2008, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories regarding 
delinquent debts and subsequently discussed his finances with a government 
investigator. (Item 8) He disclosed that his net monthly income is $6,953 and expenses 
are $2,800, including his rent. He makes monthly payments of $2,150 on financial 
obligations and debts, including delinquent accounts. He has approximately $2,000 
remaining at the end of the month. (Item 8) He and his wife are attempting to investigate 
and resolve their financial problems. (AE 1) He has not received any financial 
counseling or engaged any debt consolidation services. He thinks his financial situation 
is manageable. (Item 8 at 5) 
   
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated March 2007, February 2008, and 
October 2008, Paragraph 1 of the SOR alleges five delinquent debts, totaling $47,751, 
which accrued from late 2002 through the middle of 2008. (Items 5, 6, 7) The status of 
the debts is as follows: 
 
1. Applicant admitted owing the $118 medical debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. He 
believes it should be paid by the motorist who hit him in October 2007. (Item 3 
at 3) He has been trying to resolve it since February 2009. (Item 8 at 2) It 
remains unresolved. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
2. Applicant admitted owing the $1,300 department store debt listed in SOR ¶ 
1.b. In February 2009, he said he was contacting the company about it. (Item 
8 at 3) He said that he paid it in 2007, but did not supply any proof of 
payment. (Item 3 at 3) 
 
3. Applicant denied owing the $21,954 credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. He is 
unfamiliar with the account. (Item 3 at 3) In February 2009, he said his wife 
was working with the credit reporting bureau, but had not contacted the 
creditor. (Item 8 at 3) It remains unresolved. 
 
4. Applicant denied owing the $10,698 credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d. He is 
unfamiliar with the account. (Item 3 at 3) In February 2009, he said his wife 
was working with the credit reporting bureau, but had not contacted the 
creditor. (Item 9 at 4) It remains unresolved. 
 
5. Applicant acknowledged the $13,681 credit card listed in SOR ¶ 1.e. (Item 3 
at 3) He said that he paid the debt off in May 2009, but did not submit any 
evidence of payment.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a) an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly under AG & 19(c) Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Based on three CBRs and his statements, Applicant has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing in 2002. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. The guideline includes examples of conditions 
that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), 
the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Applicant’s multiple financial problems arose six to seven years ago, and 
 
5 
 
 
continued accruing into 2008. Because the problems are ongoing and not isolated, this 
condition does not apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that mitigation can occur when Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
attributed his financial delinquencies to periods of deployment, decreased income, and 
a period of disability. Those were circumstances beyond his control. However, he did 
not offer any evidence that he attempted to responsibly manage the debts as they were 
accruing, which is necessary to support the full application of this condition.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant did not obtain credit counseling or 
submit proof that his financial problems are under control, as required under AG & 
20(c). Hence, it does not apply. AG & 20(d) applies when the evidence shows that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ Applicant asserted that he paid two debts, but he did not provide evidence of 
such payment. Based on his service history and candid remarks throughout the record, I 
find his statements credible regarding the debts listed in SOR ¶ 1. b ($1,300) and SOR 
1 ¶ 1.e ($13,681). Hence, AG & 20(d) applies to those two, but not the other three debts 
that remain unpaid or unresolved. He denied owning the three debts, but did not 
produce documentation indicating that he successfully disputed the debts. Such 
evidence is necessary to trigger mitigation under AG & 20(e), which applies when “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 44 years old and 
honorably served this country in the military for 20 years. He has worked for a defense 
contractor for the past five years and has held a security clearance since 1985. In 
February 2009, the Government sent him a set of Interrogatories, alerting him to 
financial delinquencies that could adversely affect his security clearance. In his 
response to the Interrogatories, he said that he and his wife would be resolving some of 
the debts, particularly those that were unknown to him. In June 2009, he received the 
SOR, detailing the specific debts in question. In mid-July 2009, he received the FORM, 
notifying him that he had an additional 30 days to respond and submit documentary 
evidence pertinent to his debts. Despite having six months to investigate and address 
the Government’s concerns, he took no action on three of the alleged debtst. His failure 
to responsibly respond to those concerns calls into question his judgment and reliability. 
Given his long military history and previous experience with the security clearance 
process, I find it troubling that he did not take more aggressive steps to address all of 
the Government’s specific concerns when he learned of them.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:                                    For Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
