 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01583 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alfred S. Donau III, Esq. 
Michael B. Grayson, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns, but he has not mitigated Drug 
Involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines H and E, Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 27, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on July 16, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 6, 2009. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
called three witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received 
without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted a document, which was marked AE H, and admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 13, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since 1996. He worked for the same company from 
1980 to 1992, when the company had a different name. He held a security clearance 
from about 1980 through 1992. He worked for a different company from 1992 through 
1996. That company did not require him to hold a clearance. When he returned to his 
current employer in 1996, he reapplied for a security clearance. It was granted, and he 
continues to hold a Secret clearance. He has a master’s degree in systems engineering. 
He has been married since 1979, and has a 12-year-old child.1  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana in college, and then did not smoke 
marijuana for an extended period. He smoked marijuana again during the period 
between about 1992 and 1993, when he did not have a clearance. He stated that he did 
not smoke marijuana between 1993 and May 2005, when he started smoking marijuana 
again. He estimated that he smoked marijuana on about 25 to 30 occasions between 
May 2005 and April 2006. He testified that he smoked marijuana on the weekends, 
“basically every weekend or two during a month.” Applicant had a security clearance 
while he was using marijuana in 2005 and 2006. He was aware of his company’s anti-
drug policy, as well as the DoD’s position against illegal drug use. He purchased the 
marijuana he used from a man he met at a bar.2 
 
 Applicant was driving to work on May 1, 2006. He was stopped by the facility’s 
security officers for a random vehicle inspection as he entered the facility. The officers 
found a small amount of marijuana inside a wooden case. Applicant was arrested for 
unlawful possession of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia. He pled guilty 
to possession of drug paraphernalia. He entered a diversion program. He completed the 
program, and the charges were dismissed.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-27, 44-45, 67-68; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 33-36, 44-47, 57, 62-63, 68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 29-32, 57-59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE D. 
 
 
3 
 
 When Applicant’s employer was informed about the incident at the gate, the 
company directed him to take a urinalysis drug test on May 1, 2006. He tested positive 
for the metabolites of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active ingredient in marijuana. 
His company suspended him without pay for 30 days. He was also denied salary raises 
and bonuses for two years.4  
 
 Applicant signed a “Last Chance Agreement” with his employer on June 5, 2006. 
Under the terms of the agreement, Applicant agreed to participate in the company’s 
counseling/rehabilitation program. He agreed to submit to unscheduled drug and/or 
alcohol testing at any time up to 24 months from the date of the agreement. He also 
agreed that his employment was conditioned on him remaining drug-free.5  
 
 Applicant attended an outpatient chemical dependency program three days each 
week from about May 3, 2006, through June 21, 2006. He successfully completed the 
program. The discharge summary, signed by a licensed independent substance abuse 
counselor (LISAC), listed a diagnostic impression of cannabis dependence. The 
prognosis was good. The LISAC wrote in a letter dated June 16, 2006, that Applicant 
had been quite cooperative in group and helpful to other group members. She wrote 
that his prognosis was favorable. He completed six months of aftercare. He also 
attended Narcotics Anonymous (NA) meetings. He has taken a number of drug tests 
after the incident. Other than the original positive test taken on May 1, 2006, he has 
never tested positive.6  
 
 Applicant’s company detailed his arrest in an adverse information report 
submitted to the Defense Security Service (DSS). Applicant discussed his arrest and 
marijuana use during an interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator on June 21, 2007. He told the investigator that he smoked marijuana on an 
estimated basis of twice weekly to twice monthly from May 2005 through April 2006.7 
 
 Applicant testified that he will not use illegal drugs again. He has dissociated 
himself from any drug-using associates and contacts. His wife is a noted scientist. She 
is vehemently opposed to illegal drug use, and putting foreign substances and toxins in 
the body. Applicant signed an affidavit stating that if clear and convincing evidence of 
future illegal drug use is established, he would voluntarily and without further process 
give up his security clearance.8 
 
 Applicant submitted Questionnaires for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
April 24, 2007, and again on August 8, 2008. The answers on both SF 86s were 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 29, 72; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE G. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-33, 36-37, 63; AE F.  
 
6 Tr. at 33-34, 65-67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE B, E. 
 
7 GE 3, 4. 
 
8 Tr. at 25-26, 35, 43, 53; AE H.  
 
 
4 
 
consistent. He listed his arrest for possession of paraphernalia in May 2006, on both SF 
86s. He also listed his marijuana use between 2005 and 2006. He listed that he had a 
security clearance since 1996. Question 24b asked: 
 
Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a 
law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting the public safety?9 
 
Applicant answered “No” on both SF 86s. He misread the question. He provided the 
requested information elsewhere on both questionnaires.10 There was no intent to falsify 
that question on the SF 86s. 
 
 Three witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. His job performance has been 
outstanding. They are completely aware of Applicant’s drug use. They do not question 
his reliability, honesty, trustworthiness, or good judgment. They recommend that he 
retain his security clearance. Applicant also submitted numerous awards and 
certificates attesting to his outstanding job performance.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
9 GE 1, 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 39-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2 
 
11 Tr. at 71-81; AE C. 
 
5 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Six are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
 
6 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;  
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed and used marijuana while holding a security clearance. He 
tested positive for the metabolites of THC, the active ingredient in marijuana. AG ¶¶ 
25(a), 25(b), 25(c), and 25(g) are applicable as disqualifying conditions.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received a diagnosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional of drug abuse or drug dependence. AG ¶ 25(d) is not applicable. 
The discharge summary from Applicant’s outpatient chemical dependency program, 
signed by a licensed independent substance abuse counselor, listed a diagnostic 
impression of cannabis dependence. That is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 25(e) for 
consideration as a disqualifying condition.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges marijuana use that is also alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. SOR 
¶ 1.b is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Three Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
 
7 
 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana while in college. He quit using marijuana 
until he left his job in 1992. His new job did not require a security clearance. He smoked 
marijuana on several occasions in about 1992 and 1993. Applicant would have been 
about 38 to 39 years old at the time. He quit again until 2005, when he was about 50 
years old. He smoked marijuana regularly while holding a security clearance, until he 
was caught with marijuana in his car on May 1, 2006, while entering his company’s 
facility. After he was caught, Applicant completed a drug treatment program and his 
aftercare requirements. The licensed independent substance abuse counselor gave him 
a favorable prognosis. He has dissociated himself from his drug-using associates and 
contacts. There is no evidence of any drug abuse since May 2006. He signed what 
amounts to a statement of intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. AG ¶¶ 26(b) and 26(d) are applicable.  
 
 There is no bright-line rule as to whether conduct is recent. Applicant has not 
used illegal drugs in more than three years. However, his drug use was very extensive; 
occurred over a long period of time; and was interrupted by other long periods of 
abstinence followed by additional drug use. Applicant returned to illegal drug use when 
he was 50 years old and held a security clearance. He knew it was illegal, against his 
company’s anti-drug policy, and counter to the DoD’s position against illegal drug use. 
He also did it knowing that his wife was vehemently opposed to illegal drug use. I am 
unable to make a determination that illegal drug use is completely in his past. 
Applicant’s drug use continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that security concerns are still present despite the presence of 
some mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following mitigating condition is potentially applicable:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
8 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant incorrectly answered the same question on two Questionnaires for 
National Security Positions. However, as discussed above, the requested information 
was provided elsewhere on the questionnaires. There was no intent to deceive or 
mislead. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is an intelligent, mature, highly-regarded engineer for a defense contractor. 
That makes his choice to return to illegal drug use at the age of 50, while holding a 
security clearance, all the more disturbing. His drug use was halted when he was 
arrested with drugs in his possession, while entering his company’s facility in May 2006. 
Since then, he has checked all the boxes to attempt to establish that he is drug-free and 
trustworthy. However, he has gone long periods in the past without abusing illegal 
drugs, and then returned to drug use. I am not convinced that he will not return again to 
illegal drug use. Moreover, even if Applicant never uses illegal drugs again, his illegal 
drug use while holding a security clearance, knowing it was illegal, counter to his 
company’s and DoD’s policy, and against his wife’s wishes, raises serious doubts about 
his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Three plus years of abstinence does not 
mitigate his numerous incidents of extremely poor judgment, disregard for the law, and 
violation of the trust placed in him while holding a security clearance.  
 
 
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns, but he has not mitigated Drug 
Involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
