 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-04680  
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guideline for financial considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
On November 30, 2006, Applicant submitted a security clearance 
application (Standard Form 86) to request a security clearance required as part 
 
 
1  
 
 
2  
                                                     
of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative 
finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
request.  
 
 On March 17, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized 
on April 27, 2009, Applicant admitted all the allegations under Guideline F except 
subparagraph 1.p. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 18, 2009 and the 
case was assigned to me on May 27, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
June 3, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 1, 2009. During 
the hearing, the government offered five exhibits, marked as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified, and did not offer exhibits or witness testimony. I held the record open for 
Applicant to submit additional documentation in support of his case. He timely 
submitted one document, admitted without objection as Applicant's Exhibit (AE) 
A. DOHA received the transcript on July 10, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After 
a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant, 29 years old, is a high school graduate who completed 
approximately one semester of community college in 1998. He is single and has 
three children between the ages of seven and nine years. All three children live 
with their mothers. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1999 to 2003, and 
detached at pay grade E-4. He currently serves in the active reserves. He did not 
hold a security clearance while in the military and does not currently hold one. 
Appellant was unemployed for about 11 months in 2003 to 2004, after leaving 
active duty, and received unemployment compensation. He was again 
unemployed from approximately November 2005 to November 2006, but earned 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations 
in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3  
about $1,800 for part-time reserve duty from April to November 2006. He did not 
receive unemployment compensation during this period. He lived with his family 
when he was unemployed. For the past two-and-one-half years, he has worked 
for a defense contractor as a security officer, which primarily involves building 
access control. Applicant also holds a part-time job with an agency that provides 
counseling for inner-city youth (GE 1; Tr. 21-22, 82, 84-85, 88, 92-93, 96). 
 
 Applicant earns an annual salary of approximately $54,000. After taxes, 
child support and other deductions, his monthly net take-home pay is 
approximately $1,260. He also earns approximately $138 per month net from a 
part-time job counseling youth, and about $230 per month from reserves. 
Applicant shares living expenses with a roommate. His monthly expenses include 
$550 rent, $100 utilities, $182 car insurance, $120 gas, $60 groceries, and $150 
in extra expenses for his children. He purchased a 2006 car in 2007, for which he 
pays $389 per month. He has about $300 in a checking account and about $200 
in savings. He has no investments or retirement plans, and no credit cards. His 
monthly net remainder is approximately $50 (GE 2; Tr. 84, 98-114). 
 
 Applicant accrued significant delinquencies since 2000. He attributes his 
financial problems to being young and foolish. In 2008, Applicant talked twice 
with a debt consolidation service that offered to work with him on debt 
management, a budget, and a payout plan that required him to pay a certain 
amount, which the company would pay to the creditors. It also charged a fee in 
addition to the amount he was required to pay toward each debt In addition, he 
was required to contact the creditors himself, and he had found it difficult to reach 
them. Applicant also did not follow through with the company because it advised 
him that the best approach would be to file a bankruptcy petition. He did not wish 
to file bankruptcy for $15,000, which he considered to be a small amount of debt. 
(GE 3; Tr. 64-70, 98). 
 
 Applicant's debts, as alleged in the SOR, total $14,660. In his interrogatory 
responses of July and October 2008, Applicant indicated that he had contacted 
numerous creditors and set up payment plans with some. He also included 
copies of checks he wrote to 15 creditors. However, he did not mail these checks 
because he needed the money for an unexpected death in his family (GE 2, 3, 4, 
5; Tr. 64). The status of the SOR debts follows. 
 
• Auto loan –- $6,566 (allegation 1.a.) – Unpaid. Applicant was in an 
accident and his car was a total loss. He stopped making loan payments. 
The debt has been delinquent since 2004. In February 2009, Applicant 
contacted the creditor, who offered a lump-sum settlement of $3,000. 
Applicant testified that he has saved $1,500 toward the payment, but 
offered no documentation to support his claim of a settlement offer or his 
savings (Tr. 22-25).  
 
 
 
4  
• Communications (debts related to cell phones and land lines) - 
$1,934 (allegations 1.c., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.l.): Unpaid. Applicant testified that 
he is unsure whether the debt at 1.c. is his debt. He has not contacted the 
company or disputed it with the credit reporting agencies, and it remains 
unpaid. He contacted the creditor alleged in 1.i. in February 2009 for 
information about paying the debt, but has not paid it. He has not 
contacted the creditor alleged in 1.j. He does not recognize the debt 
alleged in 1.l., but has not contacted the creditor or the credit reporting 
agencies to dispute it (Tr. 28-29, 39-43).  
 
$ Utilities - $326 (allegation 1.d.): Unpaid. Applicant contacted the creditor    
in approximately February 2009 to get information about how and where 
to pay the debt but does not have sufficient funds to pay it (Tr. 30-31).  
 
$ Retail store - $291 (allegation 1.e.): Unpaid. Applicant has not contacted 
the creditor concerning this debt (Tr. 31-32).  
 
$   Rent - $1,166 (allegation 1.h.): Unpaid. In 2004, Applicant notified the 
rental agent that he was leaving his apartment within two weeks. He left 
before the term of the lease ended because a person was murdered in the 
parking lot. He was penalized approximately three months’ rent. He has 
not contacted the creditor (Tr. 36-39).  
 
$   Credit cards - $2,235 (allegations 1.b., 1.f.): Unpaid. The account listed at 
allegation 1.b. became delinquent in 2002. Applicant stopped making 
payments on the account. He contacted the creditor sometime before 
February 2009 but was told his account was transferred to an unknown 
collection company. Allegation 1.f. relates to a store credit card. Applicant 
tried to reach the creditor in February 2009 but the number did not work 
and he believes that the company no longer exists. He did not investigate 
further (GE 4, 5; Tr. 25-28, 32-34).  
 
$   Tax-related debt - $146 (allegation 1.g.): Unpaid. Applicant does not 
recognize this debt. He has not contacted the credit reporting agencies to 
dispute it (Tr. 34-36).  
 
$        Medical debts - $759 (allegations 1.k., 1.m – 1.o.): Unpaid. These debts 
relate to medical expenses for Applicant's children. He has not contacted 
the creditors. (Tr. 41-46).  
 
$        Federal agency - $1,247 (allegation 1.p.): Partially paid. Applicant owed 
the agency for a class from which he withdrew. In April 2008, he filed his 
2006 income tax return late, with his 2007 federal income tax return. He 
was owed income tax refunds of $637 for tax year 2006, and $3,641 for 
tax year 2007, as well as a $600 economic stimulus check. Although 
Applicant's July 2009 credit bureau report shows that he still owes $1,247, 
Applicant provided documentation showing that he owes less. The federal 
 
 
5  
                                                     
agency seized $637 from his 2006 federal income tax refund, and $467 
from his 2007 economic stimulus check, and applied both to pay the debt, 
leaving a remainder of $142.3 Applicant testified that he spoke with the 
agency twice and confirmed that he no longer owes the remaining 
amount, but provided no documentation to support that contention (GE 3; 
AE A; Tr. 46-55). 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-
sense determination based on examination of all available relevant and material 
information, and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in 
the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect 
consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred 
to as the “whole person” concept. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does 
not determine a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) at 
AG ¶ 18. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an Applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the 
preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. 
Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to 
refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a 
heavy burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information 
3 Applicant currently owes back child support of approximately $5,000 for one of his three 
children. The state that collects this child support seized $132 from his 2007 stimulus check and 
$3,641 from his 2007 income tax refund to pay back child support. Applicant's pay is garnished to 
pay child support. The child support arrearages are not alleged in the SOR (GE 3; Tr. 55-59). 
 
4 Directive 6.3 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
 
6  
                                                     
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
each Applicant possesses the judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect 
the national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a 
concern as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is 
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). Applicant owes approximately $14,000 in 
delinquent debt that he has been unable or unwilling to pay. His debts became 
delinquent starting in 2000, and, but for one that is partially paid, they remain 
delinquent, indicating a history of failure to meet financial obligations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve 
the issue. 
 
 Applicant's debts have been accruing since approximately 2000, and they 
did not occur under unusual circumstances. He has now been employed full-time 
for the past two-and-one-half years, and he earns income from a part-time job as 
well as reserve pay. Applicant testified that he saved $1,500, yet he did not use 
this money to pay any of his delinquencies, which raises questions as to his 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant experienced some periods of unemployment between 2003 and 
2006. However, his family assisted him financially during this period by allowing 
him to live at home. Applicant has not acted responsibly to deal with his 
significant debts. He purchased a new or relatively new 2006 automobile in the 
spring of 2007, and he now pays almost $400 per month on that vehicle. In 
addition, on the day he submitted his Interrogatory response (GE 2), he wrote 
checks to numerous creditors, but he did not mail the checks because he needed 
the funds for a family emergency. Finally, he testified that he has saved a 
substantial amount – $1,500 – but has not used these funds to make payments 
on his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) cannot be applied. 
 
 Neither AG ¶ 20(c) nor AG ¶ 20(d) applies. Applicant was on notice that 
delinquent debts were a security concern after he completed his security 
clearance application in 2006. He did make some effort at obtaining help with his 
finances by contacting a debt consolidation company two years later, in 2008. 
However, he did not follow through with that company’s advice and made no 
further efforts to obtain financial assistance. Moreover, Applicant's financial 
situation is not under control. Although the debt to the federal agency is partially 
paid, he still owes more than $13,000. This debt was not paid through Applicant's 
good-faith efforts, but by the agency’s seizure of Applicant's income tax refunds 
and stimulus check. The rest of the SOR debts are unpaid, with no payment 
plans in place, and no documentation to support his claims of contacts with the 
creditors. Without documentation of payments or payment plans, a good-faith 
effort to resolve debts cannot be substantiated.  
 
 
 
8  
 Applicant disputes the three debts at ¶¶ 1.c., 1.g., and 1.l. He provided no 
evidence to support his claim and has not contacted the creditors or credit 
reporting agencies to report the disputes. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. I find 
against Applicant under Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate 
the Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented 
and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I 
have also reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the 
appropriate guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 As Applicant was in his twenties at the time most of his debts became past 
due, his failure to respond to them may have resulted in part from inexperience 
and a lack of sound financial judgment. However, several questionable decisions 
were made more recently--to take on a substantial car payment in 2007 and to 
ignore the advice of the debt consolidation company. The only debt that is 
substantially paid was resolved not through his good-faith efforts, but through the 
government’s seizure of his income tax refunds and stimulus check. He has not 
set up payment plans or provided evidence to support his contacts with creditors. 
An applicant is not required to be debt-free, or establish that he paid every debt. 
But he must demonstrate that he established a plan to resolve his debts and has 
taken significant action to implement that plan. Here, Applicant has not 
established such a plan, and he still carries more than $13,000 in debt, with no 
substantive efforts to resolve his financial situation.  
 
 
 
 
 
9  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by 
section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.p.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
