1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-05561
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer  Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 14, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on March 10, 2009, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
April 20, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 14, 2009, and I convened the
hearing on July 21, 2009, in Honolulu, Hawaii. The Government offered Exhibits 1
through 4, which were received and entered into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified on his own behalf, and he submitted Exhibit A, which was received without
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on August 5, 2009. Based
2
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.b., and he denied
1.c. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 41 years old. He is not married. He received a Master’s degree in
2002, in Urban and Regional Planning.  Applicant works for a defense contractor, and
he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense
sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The SOR lists 3 allegations regarding illegal drug involvement under Adjudicative
Guideline H. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as they were
listed in the SOR:
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency,
from approximately 1985 to at least July 2007.  
Applicant testified that the dates of his marijuana usage, that are alleged in the
SOR, are correct. He stopped using marijuana primarily when he transitioned to working
on Department of Defense projects. He conceded that during his usage, he knew using
marijuana was illegal. 
Applicant began using marijuana in 1985, when he was in junior high school. He
indicated that his usage increased and when he was an undergraduate college student,
he estimated that he used marijuana once a week (Tr at 37). Applicant further testified “I
hadn’t really used it that much since graduate school in 2002.” He estimated that from
2002 until 2007, he used marijuana approximately “every couple of months, you know,
kind of at a party type of thing.” (Tr at 23-24).
Applicant has worked for his current employer for six years, and clearly he used
marijuana for four of those years. When he was asked what was his company’s policy
regarding his drug usage, he stated “There’s a chance I could be terminated [for drug
usage].” 
1.b.  The SOR alleges that Applicant purchased marijuana. During his testimony,
Applicant could not recall much of the specifics regarding his marijuana purchases, but
he did estimate that his last purchase of marijuana occurred in 2004 or 2005 (Tr at 25).
3
Upon cross examination he stated that he started purchasing it, at times with friends,
and at times alone, when he was in high school (Tr at 36-37).
1.c.  The SOR alleges that Applicant may use marijuana in the future. As
reviewed above, Applicant denied this allegation in his RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant
testified that he does not intend to use marijuana “certainly not while I have my security
clearance.” (Tr at 26). 
When asked by Department Counsel whether Applicant would state
unequivocally that he would never use marijuana again, and “is the potential out there
for  [Applicant] to use marijuana in the future?” Applicant replied, ”Anything is possible .
. . I mean, I don’t necessarily think that people can make statements that are that open
to future events.” (Tr at 42-43).
Finally, Applicant conceded that during the years of his marijuana usage, he
made a decision and did abstain from marijuana usage on two separate periods of time.
When asked why he began using marijuana again after his abstention, he testified
“Well, you know, you have weaknesses of moments, you know, weak moments. Just
like people that are alcoholics, you know, they make a commitment to stop, but
occasionally they fall off the wagon, as they say.” (Tr at 47).
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a letter from a Vice President of Applicant’s current employer
(Exhibit A). He wrote, “In performance of our government projects [Applicant] has
always represented the company professionally and his work standards and product
quality are consistently at the higher standards of our industry.” However, during his
testimony, Applicant conceded that this individual knew of his marijuana usage during
college, “but I haven’t gone into full details of this case with him.” (Tr at 45). Because
this individual was unaware that Applicant continued to use marijuana for at least four
years while he was employed by his company, I cannot not give much weight to this
recommendation. 
Applicant did submit a cover letter as part of Exhibit A in which he wrote, “I
accept an automatic revocation of clearance for any violation related to future drug use.”
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, including the possession, and the use of
marijuana, and his four years of continued use after he went to work for his current
employer, is of great concern, especially in light of his desire to have access to the
nation's secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse
clearly falls within Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DC) 25. (a) (any drug
abuse) and 25. (c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution).
5
Applicant did write that he accepted an automatic revocation of clearance for any
violation related to future drug use. However, I can not conclude at this time that
Applicant’s conduct comes within any Mitigating Condition (MC). Based on the
Applicant’s many years of knowingly using an illegal substance, especially during his
current employment, his lack of candor regarding the recency of his drug involvement to
the Vice President of his company who submitted a character letter on Applicant’s
behalf, his history of abstaining from marijuana usage for periods of time and
subsequently reusing the drug, and his equivocal statement of his unwillingness to use
marijuana again, I find that it is simply too soon to conclude that Applicant will not use
illegal substances in the future. 
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that Applicant has used illegal drugs for many years under Guideline H.
Applicant, on the other hand, has failed to introduced significant, persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome the Government's
case against him.  Accordingly, Paragraph 1, Guideline H of the SOR is concluded
against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guideline H, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on
all of the reasons cited above as to why no MC applies, and the lack of weight I have
given to his employer’s character letter, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
