 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00722 
                                                            )                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy,  Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on March 3, 2006. On May 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
 
2 
 
 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 1, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2009. 
Applicant, Department Counsel, and I agreed to a hearing date of August 10, 2009. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued, and Applicant reported for her hearing as scheduled. 
However, I was unable to convene the hearing at the appointed time because I was 
conducting another hearing that ran overtime. Applicant was unable to take part in a 
later hearing on that day because she had a travel assignment. We went on the record 
and identified an alternative time for the hearing. Accordingly, Applicant’s hearing was 
continued and rescheduled for August 17, 2009, and, on that date, I convened a hearing 
to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified 
on her own behalf and called no witnesses. She introduced five exhibits, which were 
marked as Ex. A through Ex. E. Applicant’s exhibits consisted of letters of character 
reference. Only one of the five letters of character reference, Ex. E, was signed and 
dated. I left the record open until close of business, August 31, 2009, so that Applicant 
could, if she wished, submit signed and dated copies of the letters of character 
reference conditionally marked as Ex. A through Ex. D. Applicant timely filed signed  
copies of the letters identified as Ex. A and Ex. B. She timely submitted two additional 
letters of character reference, which I marked as Ex. F and Ex. G. Ex. F was signed but 
not dated. Ex. G was neither signed nor dated. Applicant’s seven letters of character 
reference were admitted to the record without objection for whatever probative value 
they might have. 
 
 DOHA received two transcripts (Tr.) related to this hearing. The first transcript, 
received August 13, 2009, identified the hearing scheduled for August 10, 2009, 
memorialized the continuance, and identified the date and time of the rescheduled 
hearing. The second transcript, received August 21, 2009, was made from the recording 
of the rescheduled hearing conducted on August 17, 2009.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 18 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.r.) In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the 14 allegations at ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.n. She denied four allegations at ¶¶ 1.o. through 
1.r. The government conceded that the SOR allegation ¶ 1.o. duplicated SOR allegation 
¶ 1.n. and that the alleged debt could not be further identified with specificity. The 
government also conceded that it was unable to identify the medical debt alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.p. Applicant’s admissions are included herein as findings of fact. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old and separated from her husband. She lives with her 
mother, who is retired, and her 16-year-old daughter. Applicant is solely responsible for 
the support of her daughter. (Ex. 1; Tr. 37, 46-50.) 
 
 Applicant is employed by a government contractor as a network data engineer. 
She has worked for her current employer for approximately four years, and she has 
worked in the network computer field for approximately 15 years. She seeks a security 
clearance. (Ex. 1; Tr. 37-40.) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from January 1996 to April 1999, and during that 
period she attended college. She accrued student loan debt, which at the present time 
totals about $16,000. The loans were in delinquent status in the past, but Applicant has 
rehabilitated the loans and now pays $185 per month to reduce her student loan debt. 
The loans are in current status. Applicant was also unemployed between May 2001 and 
February 2004. During this second period of unemployment, her husband supported her 
and she drew money from her savings. (Ex. 1; Ex. 3 at 10; 42-43, 69-70.)  
 
 During her periods of unemployment, Applicant began to fall behind in paying her 
debts, and she continues to have financial difficulties. She admits she owes 
approximately $110,000 in delinquent debt, including two tax liens to the Internal 
Revenue Service. The two tax liens together total approximately $88,000, and they date 
to 2001. The tax liens remain unsatisfied. Applicant has been in contact with the Internal 
Revenue Service, but she has not yet worked out a payment plan or made an offer in 
compromise. (SOR ¶¶ 1.k. and 1.l.; Ex. 5; Ex, 6; Tr. 62-66.) 
 
 Applicant owes a judgment creditor a debt of approximately $13,871 for an 
automobile she purchased in 1993. The automobile was repossessed in 1996. Applicant 
last contacted the creditor in 2007. The judgment has not been satisfied. (SOR ¶ 1.a.; 
Ex. 5; Ex. 6; Tr. 66-69.)    
   
 In addition to the judgment and the two tax liens, Applicant admitted 
responsibility for ten debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.i, 1.j., and 1.m. These 
delinquent debts totaled $6,708. She denied the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.q. and 1.r. 
She disputed the amount of the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.q. and claimed she owed a 
lesser amount. However, she failed to provide documentation to corroborate her 
assertion. She also asserted that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.r. had been settled; her 
credit report of April 14, 2009, corroborated that the debt had been settled. (Ex. 6 at 2; 
Tr. 52-62.) 
 
 In May 2008, Applicant enrolled in a debt consolidation program. She agreed to 
pay the debt consolidation company $129 a month for 28 months to assist her in 
contacting her creditors and resolving her delinquent debt. At her hearing, she 
expressed dissatisfaction with the services provided by the debt consolidation company. 
She estimated that the company had paid off about 30% of the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.b. through 1.l. Applicant agreed to provide a statement from the debt consolidation 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
company showing how much of her delinquent debt had been satisfied through its 
efforts. However, she failed to provide this information. (Ex. 4; Tr. 55-60, 93.) 
 
 Applicant is a contract employee. Her federal and state income taxes are not 
deducted from her pay by her employer, and she is responsible for paying those taxes 
directly to the taxing authorities. (Tr. 72- 73, 87-89.) 
 
 Applicant’s gross monthly income, before she pays her taxes, is $6,000. After 
Applicant pays her taxes, she has a net income each month of approximately $4,000. 
She pays her own health insurance. Her monthly rent payment is $1,6651 and her 
monthly payment on the automobile she purchased in May 2006 is $498. After paying 
her other fixed monthly expenses, Applicant has a net remainder of approximately $300 
to $400. In determining her net monthly remainder, she did not include her payment to 
the debt consolidation program. She does not have a savings account. She reported the 
balance in her checking account as $58.46. (Tr. 75-82.) 
 
 Applicant reported that she had not yet paid her federal income taxes for tax year 
2008. She reported that she had requested and received from the Internal Revenue 
Service an extension until October 2009 to pay her 2008 income taxes. Applicant has 
not enrolled in consumer credit counseling. She is reluctant to consider bankruptcy 
because she feels she is responsible for paying her debts. (Tr. 33, 70, 82-83.)   
 
 Several of Applicant’s supervisors and co-workers provided letters of character 
reference on her behalf. They praised Applicant’s professionalism, technical skills, and 
dedication to mission. One of her supervisors had this to say about Applicant: 
“[Applicant] distinguished herself by her consistent hard work . . . and her ability to adapt 
to task changes at a moment’s notice. [Applicant] is an intelligent, capable [and] 
dedicated . . . person.” (Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. E; Ex. F.)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
1 Applicant stated that she planned to reduce her monthly expenses by moving to a less expensive 
apartment. (Tr. 31, 33-34.) 
 
5 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.  Additionally, under AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s 
means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis” may raise security 
concerns. 
 
Applicant is financially overextended, has accumulated substantial delinquent 
debt, and was unable to pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. If the 
financially delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might 
apply.  If “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply.  If “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply.  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The record shows that Applicant’s financial delinquencies began several years 
ago and continue to this day. Applicant’s current financial delinquencies involve 
substantial sums of money in proportion to her income and resources, occurred under 
circumstances that are likely to recur, and cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
The record does not include facts that suggest protracted conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control that would explain her failure over a period of years to meet her 
financial obligations. While she experienced unemployment in the past, she has been 
steadily employed with her current employer for the past four years. To her credit, 
Applicant sought to consolidate her debts, and she is current in paying her student loan 
obligations. She has contacted the Internal Revenue Service to negotiate a payment 
plan for her $88,000 tax liens dating to 2001. However, all but one of her debts remain 
unresolved. She has not enrolled in consumer credit counseling, and she does not have 
a plan in place to avoid financial overextension in the future. While Applicant’s intention 
to satisfy her creditors in the future is laudable, she has failed to demonstrate a track 
record of financial responsibility. She has not yet demonstrated that she will repay her 
creditors and avoid financial delinquencies in the future. I conclude that none of the 
financial considerations mitigating conditions applies to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s supervisors and 
co-workers respect and appreciate her professionalism and strong technical skills. She 
works hard and is a reliable employee. She has been steadily employed with her current 
employer for four years.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Several of Applicant’s financial delinquencies date to the late 1990s and early 
2000s, and she has addressed them only recently. Applicant’s financial problems began 
when she was a mature adult, and she failed to address her delinquent debts for a 
significant period of time, a decision that raises concerns about her judgment and 
reliability. Applicant is responsible for approximately $110,000 in delinquent debt. She 
has failed to demonstrate that she understands her financial problems, and she has not 
developed a plan to satisfy her creditors.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
            Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.m.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.n. through 1.p.:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.q.:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.r.:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
