                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 08-08944 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, but failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
On March 31, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines B, E, G, H and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 18, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 15, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 21, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on August 18, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. The Government also offered for 
administrative notice Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through IV, which were accepted. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 25, 2009.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government moved to amend SOR ¶ 3.c, deleting the date “March 4, 2005”, 
and substituting the date “June 2005.” Applicant did not object, and the motion was 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except allegation ¶ 4.e. The 
admissions are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He has been offered a job with a federal contractor 
which requires a security clearance. He is single. He has a bachelor’s degree and is 
presently a student completing a graduate program on-line. He does not work and is 
supported by his father while he finishes his degree. He graduated from high school in 
1991. From 1991 to 2005, he worked in the motion picture industry.1  
 
 In late 2007, Applicant met a woman from Colombia through an on-line internet 
service. He met her about once a month at a coffee shop to talk for about 30 to 45 
minutes. They talked about her boyfriend or who they were dating and family matters. 
They have never dated and their friendship is strictly platonic. He has not spoken to her 
in more than four months. She is employed by the Colombian embassy. Applicant will 
discontinue his friendship with her if it is a security concern.2  
 
 Applicant is a recovering alcoholic. He began drinking alcohol infrequently in high 
school while on summer break. He went to college in 1993, and his drinking increased. 
He quit school in 1994. He moved to another state and his drinking increased again. He 
would drink two to three times a week and on the weekend with friends. His weekend 
consumption was approximately 10 to 12 pints of beer.3  
 
1 Tr. 29-32. 
 
2 Tr. 27-28, 33-34. 
 
3 Tr. 34-46. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
In August 1995, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol (DUI) and Driving on a Suspended License. On September 18, 
1995, he pled guilty and was sentenced to probation for three years and was given a 
$1,419 fine. He testified he spent a night in jail, but did not remember being sentenced 
to two days in jail. Applicant disputed he was driving on a suspended license at the time 
of his arrest. Subsequent to his plea of guilty, his license was suspended. He admitted 
he continued to drive on a suspended license because he had to get to work. He 
believes his father paid the fine.4  
 
On September 29, 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving on a 
Suspended License. He pled guilty and was placed on probation conditioned upon 
serving 10 days in jail and paying a $940 fine. He did not serve any jail time and failed 
to pay the fine. A bench warrant was issued on May 19, 1997, and his probation was 
revoked. He continued to drive on a suspended license. 
 
On March 25, 2000, Applicant was drinking at a bar with friends. He lived 30 
miles from the bar and proceeded to drive home. He was in a one-car accident when he 
“hit the side of a mountain.” He was transported to the hospital and received stitches in 
his head. He was arrested and charged with DUI and Driving on a Suspended License. 
His blood alcohol level was .17%. The bench warrant from May 19, 1997, was 
discovered. He admitted he had been driving on a suspended license for three years. 
On August 31, 2000, Applicant pled guilty to DUI and was sentenced to 96 hours in jail. 
He received a $2,035 fine and was ordered to complete an alcohol abuse program.His 
license was restricted, and he was ordered to have a monitoring device installed on his 
vehicle. On April 5, 2002, a bench warrant was issued for Applicant because he failed to 
comply with the requirements of the alcohol abuse program. Applicant’s explanation for 
his failure to complete the program was because he moved to a different state. He did 
not contact the state where he was convicted prior to his move. He did not recall if he 
paid the fine. He admitted he drove on a suspended license from the time of his 
sentence in September 1996, until he was arrested again in March of 2000.5 
 
In the summer of 2002, Applicant moved to a new state and his consumption of 
alcohol increased. He was drinking approximately 10-12 pints of beer a couple of times 
a week. In January 2005, he moved again to another new state to attend college. On 
January 22, 2005, Applicant was cited by the campus police with an alcohol violation, 
non-compliance with an official, and disorderly conduct. On March 4, 2005, he 
committed another alcohol violation on campus. He admitted he was drunk on campus, 
a violation of school policy. The school disciplinary board issued him a deferred 
suspension and barred him from residing or visiting residences halls, and he was 
required to complete substance abuse counseling. He sought assistance and met with a 
clinical psychologist to discuss his alcohol abuse and his attention deficit disorder.6 
4 Tr. 48-56. 
 
5 Tr.56-70. 
 
6 Tr. 46-48, 70-72, 76-78. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
In June 2005, Applicant was arrested by the city police where he attended 
school, and charged with public intoxication. He spent the night in jail, paid a fine, and 
was released the next day.7  
 
On April 23, 2006, Applicant again violated the school’s alcohol policy. He was 
suspended from school for one year, from May 2006 to June 2007. He was required to 
attend alcohol treatment as a condition for reinstatement to school. Applicant attended 
alcohol treatment from September 2006 to November 2006. He was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent by a medical doctor and a licensed clinical alcohol/drug counselor 
(LCADC). While in treatment he was prescribed and took Antabuse. He completed the 
required 21 sessions of treatment. He attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) while 
attending alcohol treatment. The discharge summary stated: “Follow-up plan: 12–Step 
group and individual psychotherapy.” Applicant attended some AA meetings and saw 
either a psychotherapist or psychologist.8  
 
Applicant testified he last consumed alcohol in September 2006. He is not 
concerned about drinking now. He last attended an AA meeting in April 2009. He stated 
he has not attended since then because he is busy with school and caring for his father. 
He did not have a sponsor. He does not serve as a sponsor. He never completed the 
12-step program. He completed Step-4. He stated he intends to go back to AA when he 
moves from his current location back to where he attended school.9  
 
Applicant moved to Morocco in January 2007 for seven months and took classes 
while there. He stated he helped establish AA meetings. While there he used hashish 
about 10-15 times. Hashish is legal in Morocco. He moved back to the U.S. in July 
2007. His suspension from college expired and he reenrolled in school.10  
 
On October 17, 2007, Applicant was charged by campus police with disorderly 
conduct. He had requested through the student disability service that he be permitted 
an extension of time to complete an exam because he has attention deficit disorder. He 
was denied the extension. Applicant stated that the Director thought he was overexcited 
and she felt threatened. No alcohol was involved.11  
 
From 1996 to December 2007, Applicant used illegal drugs. From June 1996 to 
July 2000, he used marijuana about 100 times each year. From 2000 to 2005, he used 
marijuana about 25 times each year. From 2005 to December 2007, he used marijuana 
about three to four times. From June 1996 to July 2000, he used cocaine three times. In 
 
 
7 Tr. 71, 76-86. 
 
8 Tr. 86-94; 100-102; AE D and F. 
 
9 Tr. 103-107. 
 
10 Tr. 94-98. 
 
11 Tr. 98-100. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
late 2005, he used cocaine one time. From 1996 to 2000, he purchased marijuana for 
personal use on various occasions.12  
 
Applicant used illegal drugs with his roommates at their house. When he used 
cocaine, it was at parties. He knew the drugs were illegal, but was not concerned about 
getting caught because he was at home. The last time he used cocaine was in late 
2005. He knew he was breaking the law. He stated he does not have a drug problem. 
He does not consider substance abuse a link to alcoholism. He has never had to take a 
drug test. He does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. He still associates with 
one of his former roommates, with whom he used drugs. They talk on the phone often 
and last saw each other about five months ago. In answers to interrogatories Applicant 
stated: “I decided to stop using illegal substances when I chose to pursue a career in 
the intelligence community.” He further stated: “I decided to stop using illegal 
substances because I realized I wanted more out of life. I want to help combat global 
terrorism as a valued member of the intelligence community. Once I realized this, 
stopping was not hard at all.”13 
 
Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) on April 4, 2008. 
He answered “no” to the question asking if he had ever been charged or convicted of 
any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs. He also answered “no” to the question asking 
if in the last 7 years he had been arrested for, charged with or convicted of any 
offense(s) not already listed. Applicant, did list he “received a DUI in 2000”. He did not 
list his 1995 DUI conviction. He did not list his arrest for public intoxication in June 2005. 
Initially when asked why he did not list his 1995 DUI he twice stated “I didn’t think to. I 
only thought to list the DUI in 2000.” When questioned if he intended to keep the 1995 
DUI a secret, he responded: “Certainly not.” He went on to say regarding the 1995 
conviction:  
 
I’m filling out this a Standard Form 86 in the hopes of getting a security 
clearance. I am well aware of all my discrepancies, of all of my 
indiscretions. And quite honestly it sucks to have to fill this out. I mean 
DUI’s, marijuana smoking. It’s humiliating. It doesn’t make it right.14  
 
He further stated “Yes, not putting down the 1995 DUI, I didn’t think to do it. I 
mean I said, ‘all right, I’ll tell them about my 2000 DUI and move on.’ ” When questioned 
further he stated “Okay, I’m thinking, ‘do they really need to know about a DUI that I got 
more than ten years ago? A first offense.” He then stated he decided not to list the 1995 
DUI. I find Applicant intentionally and deliberately omitted relevant information on his 
SCA. Regarding information provided about his 2000 DUI conviction, Applicant stated in 
the SCA: “I attended a court-ordered alcohol program. The case has since been 
12 Tr. 109-121. 
 
13 Tr. 100-123; GE 2. 
 
14 Id. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
dismissed.”15 The court-ordered alcohol program he mentions is the one he failed to 
complete when he left the state, for which the bench warrant was issued. He stated at 
his hearing that he was told by someone at the court that his case was dismissed. He 
believed that it meant there was no longer a file on him. I did not find Applicant’s 
testimony credible.16  
 
On his SCA, Applicant listed that he used marijuana from 1996 to 2000, 
approximately 25 times. He listed that he used cocaine from June 1996 to 2000, 
approximately three times. He failed to list that he used marijuana from 2000 to 2005, 
approximately 25 times, and he again used it from 2005 to December 2007, three to 
four times. He did not list his 2005 cocaine use. He did not list his hashish use because 
it was legal in Morocco. In answers to interrogatories, Applicant again did not list his 
more recent drug use. He admitted at his hearing that he “low balled” the number of 
uses on his SCA. He stated: 
 
I low balled this number because filling out the original questionnaire, the 
original SF 86, I’m thinking to myself, ‘My God, if I let the U.S. Government 
know that I smoked marijuana maybe 100 times a year between 1996 and 
2000, its laughable. What’s the point in even filling out the questionnaire? 
They’ll never give me a security clearance.17 
 
He admitted he deliberately falsified the number of time he used illegal drugs. He 
explained he now realizes he did not have to divulge some of his illegal drug use 
because it fell outside of the time period of “since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years 
whichever is shorter.” He believed he made a mistake by including the information on 
his drug use from 1996 to 2000. He acknowledged that regardless what information he 
provided, he was required to tell the truth.18 
 
Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he has been in recovery since 
December 2007. He explained what he meant is that he has not had any alcohol or 
drugs since then.  
 
 
 
 
 
15GE 1 at page 27.  
 
16 Tr. 129-137. Applicant’s omissions about his 1995 DUI and public intoxication convictions, and 
incomplete information about the court ordered alcohol program are not considered for disqualifying 
purposes, but will be considered when analyzing his credibility and the “whole person.” 
 
17 Tr. 137-144, 152-154.  
 
18 Id.; GE 1. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
Colombia19 
 
 Colombia is a constitutional, multi-party democracy and the second most 
populous country in South America. Any person born in Colombia is considered a 
Colombian citizen. There are travel warnings for U.S. citizens by the Department of 
State highlighting the dangers of violence by narcoterrorist groups and other criminal 
elements in Colombia. Foreigners continue to be victims of threats, kidnappings, and 
other criminal acts and there are severe restrictions on travel to and within Colombia for 
Americans residing there for official duties. Victims of violence have included journalists, 
missionaries, scientists, human rights workers, and tourists including children. The 
Secretary of State has designated three Colombian groups as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations that have carried out bombings and other attacks. They have also 
targeted critical infrastructure, public recreation areas and modes of transportation. 
They have also targeted civilians, government workers, politicians and soldiers. One 
terrorist organization held three U.S. citizen government contractors as hostages for five 
years. The government of Colombia’s record on human rights has improved, but there 
are still serious problems, including unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced 
disappearances, insubordinate military collaboration with criminal groups, torture and 
mistreatment of detainees, and other serious human rights abuses. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
19 All of the information was taken from HE I through IV. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
I have considered all of the foreign influence disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
7. I have especially considered the following: 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and 
 
9 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
Applicant has inconsistent and infrequent contact with a woman who is a 
Colombian national and works at the Colombian embassy. Their relationship is platonic 
and casual. There is no evidence that it would create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, pressure or inducement. There is no evidence that Applicant’s infrequent 
contact with her creates a conflict of interest. Applicant has not seen her in several 
months and although they appear to be friends, there is not an emotional commitment. I 
find none of the foreign influence disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant has a significant history of marijuana use. He also has used cocaine. 
He admitted he purchased marijuana. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
10 
 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use from 1996 to 2007 was frequent. He decreased the 
frequency in the latter years, but was still a consistent abuser. He last used it in 
December 2007. His motivation for discontinued use is career development. Applicant’s 
period of abstinence is less than two years. Although hashish was not illegal when he 
used it, he did continue to use mind altering drugs. Most of Applicant’s use of illegal 
drugs was not during a period of youthful indiscretion, but was rather while he was 
adult. I do not find there were unusual circumstances. I do not find mitigating condition 
(a) applicable.  
 
Applicant has not used illegal drugs since December 2007. He indicated his 
intent not to use them in the future. He has contact with only one of his friends with 
whom he used drugs. He appears to be devoted to his college course work. It appears 
Applicant’s motivation for abstaining from use of illegal drugs is due to his goal to work 
in the intelligence field. It also appears he is ready to put his life in order. I find mitigating 
condition (b) applies.  
 
Applicant has not participated in a drug treatment program. I find mitigating 
condition (d) does not apply. 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
 
11 
 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
 (g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
  Applicant was diagnosed by a medical doctor and licensed alcohol counselor as 
alcohol dependent. He has had numerous alcohol incidents, including criminal charges 
and school violations, resulting in his suspension from college. He failed to comply with 
a court ordered alcohol program which resulted in a bench warrant being issued. 
Applicant had a consistent pattern of excessive drinking. I find all of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
  I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous, or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who Is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant has abstained from drinking alcohol since September 2006. Prior to 
then he had a consistent pattern of alcohol abuse. I find mitigating condition (a) applies 
because Applicant has abstained from alcohol consumption for almost three years. He 
has not had any alcohol-related incidents in three years. I find mitigating condition (b) 
applies. Applicant successfully completed alcohol rehabilitation in September 2006. It 
was recommended that he continue to participate in AA, complete the 12-step program, 
and attend individual psychotherapy. Applicant has participated in AA, but at present his 
attendance is sporadic. He does not have a sponsor. He has completed four steps of 
the 12-step program. Finally, I find (d) only partially applies, because although Applicant 
did complete an alcohol rehabilitation program, he is somewhat sporadic in his 
 
12 
 
 
                                                          
participation with AA, when regular participation was recommended. He also is not 
actively engaged in a 12-step program and has not received a favorable prognosis from 
a duly qualified medical professional.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has numerous arrests, charges and convictions, including for DUI, 
driving on a suspended license, and public intoxication. Applicant used illegal drugs 
regularly for more than ten years. He purchased illegal drugs. He violated the terms of 
his probation by driving on a suspended license. He failed to complete a court-ordered 
alcohol program, thereby resulting in the issuance of a bench warrant. Applicant 
intentionally and deliberately omitted relevant information on his SCA, which constituted 
a felony offense.20 There is sufficient evidence to raise all of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
20 Title 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
 
13 
 
 
 Applicant repeatedly violated the law for more than ten years. He has two 
convictions for DUI. He showed a repeated disregard for the court-mandated 
suspension of his driver’s license. He intentionally omitted relevant information from his 
SCA. Based on his long history of criminal violations, deliberate omissions, and his 
failure to comply with his probations, I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to considerations of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 Applicant admitted he deliberately failed to divulge important relevant information 
on his SCA pertaining to his drug usage because he knew it would hinder his ability to 
 
14 
 
 
obtain a security clearance. He deliberately minimized his drug usage. Applicant may 
not have had to divulge some of his drug use because it was outside the period of time 
requested. However, I find that when he chose to provide such information, he had a 
duty to tell the truth and provide accurate information and not deliberately provide false 
information. In addition to Applicant’s omissions on his SCA, he also has a history of 
violations he committed while attending college, to include alcohol violations, non-
compliance with an official, disorderly conduct, receiving a deferred suspense, being 
barred from residing or visiting residence halls, and finally being suspended from school 
for a year for violating the school’s alcohol policy. Applicant also used hashish from 
January 2007 to July 2007. Hashish was not illegal in the country where Applicant used 
it, so it is not disqualifying. It is somewhat disturbing that he stated his motivation for 
discontinuing his drug use was because he wanted to get into the intelligence field, yet 
he chose to use a mind altering drug, that is illegal in the U.S., while pursuing a 
curriculum where government employment was likely. I find all of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
  
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith effort to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened  under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his security clearance application. He felt that if he 
was truthful, l it would reduce his opportunity of obtaining a security clearance. He did 
not correct the falsification before he was confronted with the facts. His intentional 
omissions are not minor, nor are they mitigated by the passage of time. There are no 
unique circumstances that would relieve Applicant from telling the truth. His conduct 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant also has a 
series of violations that occurred while he was attending college that resulted in being 
suspended for a year. All but one of these violations was the result of his alcohol 
dependency. I find he has acknowledged his alcohol dependency and obtained 
counseling. He has also taken positive steps to remain sober. I find mitigating conditions 
 
15 
 
 
(d) and (e) apply to Applicant’s conduct which was the result of his alcohol dependency. 
I do not find any mitigating conditions apply to his intentional omissions on his SCA.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a long history of drug 
abuse, alcohol dependency, criminal violations, rules violations, and personal conduct, 
including lying on his SCA. He has abstained from alcohol use for three years. He last 
used illegal drugs in December 2007.  
 
For more than ten years Applicant exercised a disregard for the law. Not only on 
hundreds of occasions did he abuse illegal drugs and misuse alcohol, thereby resulting 
in DUI and suspended license convictions, but he also failed to abide by the courts’ 
orders imposed on him as part of his sentences. Alcohol was a big factor in his poor 
judgment. However, even after he started his present period of abstention from the use 
of alcohol, he continued to use illegal drugs. Although hashish was not illegal because 
he used it in Morocco, one has to question his commitment to turning his life around and 
his pursuit to a career in the intelligence field based on his actions. One also has to 
question his commitment to sobriety, when his motivation for discontinued drug use is 
due to career motivation. It is also troubling that Applicant was attending AA and was 
abstaining from alcohol consumption, but not drug use.  
 
I am not convinced that a sufficient period of time has elapsed to test his 
commitment to abstaining from future drug use. Applicant’s long history of alcohol and 
drug abuse, and criminal conduct does not reflect a period in his life of youthful 
misconduct. He was well beyond those years. Instead, it reflects a disregard for 
compliance with rules, whether they are imposed by a legislature or by school officials. 
 
16 
 
 
He clearly made a conscious decision regarding information he wanted the government 
to be made aware about his background. Rather than providing honest thorough 
responses as was required, he intentionally gave incomplete and inaccurate 
information. Applicant has been going to school and pursuing a difficult curriculum. It 
appears he is taking steps towards moving his life in the right direction. However, he 
has a long history reflecting questionable and illegal conduct that will continue to follow 
him until he can show a considerable period of consistently law-abiding conduct. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Foreign 
Influence and Alcohol Consumption, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under 
the guidelines for Personal Conduct, Drug Involvement, and Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a-4.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 4.d-4.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 5.a-5.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
