                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09012 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 6, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 15, 2009. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on July 21, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
August 17, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Hearing 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Exhibits (HE) I though IV, requesting I take administrative notice of the latter. Applicant 
did not object, the exhibits were admitted, and the request for administrative notice was 
granted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A and B, they were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 21, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. He immigrated to the U.S. from Sri Lanka in 1990 and 
became a naturalized citizen in 2006. He earned a bachelors degree in 1993 and later 
earned a masters degree. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2006 and has 
held a public trust position since 2006.1  
 
 Applicant grew up in Sri Lanka and moved to the U.S. to study. He earned an 
associates degree in Sri Lanka. His mother lives in Sri Lanka and is ailing. He travels 
there to visit her. Since 2000, he has traveled about six to seven times and stays 
between 10 and 20 days per visit, with his mother. He calls her on the telephone about 
once a month. He provides financial support to his mother. He estimated that in 2008 he 
provided approximately $3,000 and to date in 2009, approximately $1,000. In past 
years, he has provided approximately $500 to $1,000 to his mother. His mother is a 
retired school teacher who receives a pension from the government. The health care 
system and hospitals are funded by the government and there are also private 
hospitals. The money Applicant sends to his mother is to subsidize her medical care. 
His mother owns her home. He does not believe he has any inheritance rights, and the 
home will go to his brother when she dies.2  
 
 Applicant married his wife in 1997 in the U.S. She is a medical doctor. She is a 
citizen of Sri Lanka and was visiting the U.S. when they met. She moved back to Sri 
Lanka in February or March of 1998, and gave birth to a daughter in July 1998. His wife 
returned to the U.S. in 2000 and they lived together until 2003. She then moved back to 
Sri Lanka with their daughter and has not returned. His daughter is a citizen and 
resident of Sri Lanka. Applicant provides child support for his daughter. He pays for 
most of her tuition to attend additional classes outside of school. He estimated he 
provides approximately $2,000 a year in child support.3  
 
 Applicant is estranged from his wife. When he travels to Sri Lanka, he has limited 
contact with her and then only when he goes to visit his daughter. He visits his daughter 
about once a year. He may speak on the phone with his wife about his daughter, but 
this contact is infrequent. He calls his daughter about once a month. He admits he does 
1 Tr. 10, 22-24. 
 
2 Tr. 24, 38-39, 46-47, 52-54. 
 
3 Tr. 19-21, 30-40, 43-45. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
not have a good relationship with his daughter. He does visit with her, at her house, 
when he travels to Sri Lanka. He will spend a few hours with his daughter during his 
visits and the rest of the time with his mother. His daughter does not visit Applicant’s 
mother. His wife has not returned to the U.S since she left in 2003. Applicant anticipated 
that after his mother dies, he will not go back to Sri Lanka to see his daughter. He 
stated it is up to his wife whether she will permit him to see his daughter or visit him in 
the U.S. He stated it is difficult for him to see her in Sri Lanka and it is only if his wife 
allows it. He stated he doubted his daughter would come and stay with him.4  
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law live with his wife in Sri Lanka. The only time he sees 
them is when he visits his daughter annually. His father-in-law is a retired government 
worker. His mother-in-law is a retired nurse who worked for the Sri Lankan hospital 
system.5  
 
 Applicant is still legally married to his wife. He has not filed for a divorce. In his 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview in 2006, he stated that living apart 
has put a strain on their marriage, but they are not legally separated nor will they 
divorce. At his hearing, Applicant stated he contacted an attorney in 2003 regarding a 
divorce. His statements are inconsistent. He has not pursued a divorce because of the 
cost. Applicant’s father was sick in 2005 and died in 2006. In 2007, his mother became 
ill. He stated he has been focused on those problems instead.6  
 
 Applicant stated he has no relationships in the U.S. His focus is on his job and he 
wants to continue to live in the U.S. He has no options in Sri Lanka and that is the 
reason he plans on remaining in the U.S.7 
 
 Applicant has no relatives in the U.S. He owns a house he bought in 2005 for 
approximately $480,000. He does not own any property in Sri Lanka. He has no foreign 
investments. He estimated he has approximately $6,000 in savings and $7,000-$8,000 
in his checking account. He also has approximately $5,000 in a 401k account.8  
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Sri Lanka. He does not always see 
him when he visits Sri Lanka. His brother works for a private factory. His brother’s wife 
works for the same factory. Applicant does not speak to his brother. His brother does 
not participate in the care for their mother. His brother has not discussed moving to the 
4 Tr. 41-43, 47-51, 54. 
 
5 Tr. 52. 
 
6 Tr. 30, 65-68. 
 
7 Tr. 67-68. 
 
8 Tr. 26-30, 39. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
U.S. Applicant last saw his brother at his father’s funeral in 2006. No one in Applicant’s 
family visits him in the U.S.9 
 
 When Applicant visits Sri Lanka, he registers his visit and where he is staying 
with the local police station, as required of all foreign visitors. He advises the police he 
is a U.S. citizen staying with his mother.10   
 
 Applicant traveled and visited Sri Lanka in 1993 and then approximately every 
three years until his parents’ health became an issue. He then increased his visits and 
visited in 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009. He visited both his mother 
and daughter on his last visit in April 2009.11  
 
 Applicant provided a letter from a person who worked with him for the past twelve 
months. His coworker stated Applicant appears to be an honest person who has no 
personal or political issues. Applicant also provided a certificate of appreciation from an 
employer. 12 
 
Sri Lanka13 
 
 Sri Lanka is a constitutional, multiparty republic. The law requires all foreign 
guests in private households to register in person at the nearest local police station. The 
U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the dangers in travel to Sri Lanka. Despite 
the government’s announcement that it had achieved victory over an armed insurgent 
group, there is still potential for instability, including terrorist attacks. Prior to the victory 
being declared in May 2009, the country was embroiled in more than 25 years of civil 
war and terrorism.  
 
 The U.S. government designated a Sri Lankan group as a foreign terrorist 
organization. The Sri Lankan government and the terrorist organization have engaged 
“in any means necessary” tactics to fight the war, including the government’s use of 
paramilitary organizations that rely on abduction, extrajudicial killings, and other illegal 
tactics to combat the terrorist group.  
 
 Travel in certain parts of the country is discouraged due to possible renewed 
insurgency and uncleared land mines. U.S. Government officials are prohibited from 
non-official travel to certain parts of the country.  
 
9 Tr. 51-52, 61. 
 
10 Tr. 62-64. 
 
11 Tr. 59-61. 
 
12 Tr. 71-72; AE A and B. 
 
13 HE I-IV. 
 
5 
 
 
 The government’s respect for human rights declined as armed conflict escalated. 
Unlawful use of child-soldiers, politically motivated killings, arbitrary arrests and 
detentions, and unlawful killings by paramilitary groups and others working with the 
awareness of the government, along with serious human rights abuses, were reported 
during 2008. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
 
7 
 
 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant’s wife, daughter, mother, brother and 
parents-in-law are all citizens and residents of Sri Lanka. He also travels regularly to 
visit his mother and daughter. His wife is employed at a hospital there and his mother 
and parents-in-law receive pensions through the government. Although he describes his 
relationship with his wife as estranged, he remains married to her. His relationship with 
his wife, daughter and mother creates a heightened risk of foreign pressure, or 
attempted exploitation. Applicant’s connection with his wife, daughter and mother also 
creates a conflict of interest because his continuing relationships are sufficiently close to 
raise a security concern. Therefore, I find disqualifying conditions (a) and (b) apply. It 
does not appear Applicant has a financial or business interest in Sri Lanka and 
disqualifying condition (e) does not apply. It appears Applicant does not maintain 
contact with his brother. Applicant is not sufficiently close to his parents-in-law to raise a 
security concern. I find no disqualifying conditions apply to his brother or parents-in-law. 
Applicant does not share living quarters with his relatives, so disqualifying condition (c) 
does not apply. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant has traveled to Sri Lanka to visit his mother and daughter regularly. He 
provides financial support to both of them. He remains married to his wife, even though 
they do not live together. Her parents live with his wife and his daughter. He calls his 
daughter on the phone. Applicant has not met his burden of establishing that it is 
unlikely he will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
family living in Sri Lanka and the interests of the U.S. His contacts with family in Sri 
Lanka could potentially force him to choose between the two.  
 
 
8 
 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. Sri Lanka requires Applicant 
to register at the local police station and list where he is staying. No evidence was 
presented that Sri Lanka conducts intelligence operations against the U.S. However, 
there is evidence regarding Sri Lanka’s human rights record and active terrorist groups 
operating in the country. This places the burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his contacts in Sri Lanka do not pose a security risk, and he is not in a 
position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the U.S. and his family members. 
With its negative human rights record and its government’s willingness to use 
paramilitary forces and “any means necessary” to combat the enemy should the terrorist 
threat be regenerated and civil war be reignited, it is conceivable that Applicant’s family 
members could be vulnerable to coercion. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 2006. He has no family in the U.S. All of 
his family tires remain in Sri Lanka. His wife, daughter, and mother are citizens and 
residents of Sri Lanka. His mother receives a government pension. He visits Sri Lanka 
regularly to visit his daughter and mother. He provides financial support to both of them. 
He talks on the phone to them. He has some contact with his wife. Considering Sir 
Lanka’s human rights record and the potential conflict of interest, I find under the 
circumstances mitigating condition (b) does not apply.  
 
Security concerns are reduced where contact and correspondence with foreign 
citizens are casual and infrequent because the risk of foreign exploitation or pressure is 
less. Applicant visits and provides financial support to his mother and daughter. He 
remains married to his wife and they have discussions regarding their daughter. These 
contacts are not casual and infrequent. I find mitigating condition (c) does not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 
2006. He has been married since 1997 and has a daughter. Both his wife and daughter 
are citizens and residents of Sri Lanka. Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of 
Sri Lanka. She receives a government pension. Applicant occasionally sees his 
parents-in-law when visiting his daughter, but has minimal emotional contact with them. 
He visits his mother and daughter regularly. He provides financial support to both. He 
talks on the phone to them. He has less contact with his wife. He has no family in the 
U.S., but does have assets here. His last contact with his brother was at his father’s 
funeral. He does not maintain regular contact with him. Considering his contacts, Sri 
Lanka’s human rights record, and the potential conflict of interest, Applicant has not met 
his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
Foreign Influence guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
