 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08–06311
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On August 15, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with a defense
contractor. After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background investigation,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) twice issued to
Applicant written interrogatories  regarding information in his background. Based on the1
results of the background investigation and his responses to the interrogatories, DOHA
adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines replace the guidelines listed in Enclosure
2 to the Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7.4
 Id. 5
2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified
information. On March 27, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline H (illegal drugs).3
On April 14, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a decision
without a hearing. On May 7, 2009, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision. The FORM4
included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in support of the government’s case.
Applicant received the FORM on May 13, 2009. He had 30 days from receipt of the
FORM in which to file a response and additional information.  However, he did not5
timely submit further information and the case was assigned to me on August 4, 2009.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged Applicant used marijuana between 24 and 50 times
from 1993 until at least April 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he grew marijuana and sold it to
help finance his wedding in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and that he grew and sold marijuana
while he was in college (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant admitted these allegations without
explanation. (FORM, Item 3) In addition to the facts entered in the record through
Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is a 35-year-old college graduate with a degree in Management and
Information Systems. He has worked as a Lead Developer for his current employer
since February 2005. Applicant and his wife have been married since June 2003, and
they have two children (ages 4 and 2). (FORM, Items 4 and 5)
When Applicant submitted his SF 86, he disclosed that he had used marijuana
10 times since February 2004 and that he had produced, bought, and sold illegal drugs
for profit. (FORM, Item 4) When he was interviewed by a government investigator in
November 2007, he further disclosed that he had actually used marijuana as many as
50 times from 1993, his second year in college, until October 2007. He stated that he
has generally used the drug alone or with his wife. He also disclosed that he grew and
sold about one pound of marijuana to finance his wedding reception. (FORM, Item 5). 
At the time he responded to a second set of DOHA interrogatories on July 14,
2008, Applicant had last used marijuana in April 2008. He also stated that his wife still
used marijuana at home, and that his use had moderated such that he had used about
24 times over the previous 24 months. He also averred that he easily could stop using,
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
3
if necessary for his job or security clearance, because his use of marijuana is so
infrequent. He has stopped in the past for work or when his wife has been pregnant.
(FORM, Item 6)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors6
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concern and adjudicative factors under AG ¶ 24
(Guideline H - drug involvement).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a8
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
The security concern raised by the allegations of illegal drug involvement by the
Applicant is that “[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” AG ¶ 24.
The government’s information is sufficient to support, and Applicant has admitted
to, the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c; specifically, that he used, produced, possessed,
and/or trafficked in illegal drugs from the time he was about 19 years old until he was 35
years old. Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG
¶ 25(a) ([a]ny drug abuse) and AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation,
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug
paraphernalia). 
The security significance of Applicant’s illegal drug involvement might be
mitigated if he could show that his use was not recent, that it was infrequent, is not likely
to recur, or does not cast doubt on his “current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” (AG ¶ 26(a)) The facts established here might also be mitigated if Applicant
could establish “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” (AG
¶ 26(b)) As to recency and “an appropriate period of abstinence,” he has not stated that
he no longer uses marijuana. Even if he did stop using in April 2008, because he had
used marijuana for his entire adult life, abstinence between over the ensuing 18 months
is insignificant. Further, Applicant’s statement that he would stop using if necessary for
his job or security clearance is not sufficient for the government to entrust him with
sensitive information. Finally, he has not, and likely will not, disassociate himself from
others who use illegal drugs, because his wife still smokes marijuana. On balance, there
is no information available on which to base application of any of the Guideline H
mitigating conditions.
Whole Person Concept 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 35 years old and
 See footnote 6, supra.10
 See footnote 9, supra. 11
5
presumed to be a mature adult. However, available information shows only that he has
been significantly involved with illegal drugs for his entire adult life and that marijuana is
still prevalent in his personal circumstances through his wife’s ongoing use, if not
through his own use. There is no information in this record about any other facet of his
background that sufficiently counters the adverse information underlying the security
concerns about his drug use. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available10
information bearing on Applicant’s drug use shows he has failed to address
satisfactorily the government’s doubts about his suitability for access to classified
information. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.11
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
