                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08571 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from the financial 
problems alleged in the statement of reasons. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 14, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On April 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
1  FORM Item 4. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified, and revised.2 The SOR alleges a 
security concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked. 
 
On June 1, 2009, Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA. She 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 19, 2009, was 
provided to her by letter dated June 22, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on June 
29, 2009. She was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not submit any materials, comments, or 
objections in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 4, 
2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, except for SOR ¶ 1.f, 
which she denied. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact.   
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old planner-buyer who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2007.3 She attended college from September 1998 to May 2000. 
It is not clear from her security clearance application whether she received a degree or 
diploma. Applicant married her spouse in 1981, and they have three adult children, ages 
31, 26, and 25.  
 
Applicant has been employed from October 1989 to the present, except for two 
periods of unemployment from November 2001 to February 2002, and from June 2004 
to November 2004. She worked for private companies, two government contractors, 
and was self-employed for some time. She worked for the first government contractor 
from June 2003 to June 2004. She was hired by the second government contractor in 
June 2007, and has worked for that company since.  
 
In her 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed she had four 
debts that were currently over 90 days delinquent. She also disclosed she was having 
financial problems resulting from the decline of her spouse’s work schedule, and that 
she was trying to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3  Item 4 (2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this decision, unless stated otherwise. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial problems. The SOR 
alleges seven delinquent and/or charged-off accounts totaling approximately $36,000. 
The delinquent debts were established by Applicant’s admissions and her two credit 
reports (Items 5 and 6).4 Most of the debts have been delinquent since around 2006-
2007. Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.f stating that the debt was resolved many years ago. 
She presented no documentary evidence to support her claim. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to a number of related events (Item 7). 
She and her husband purchased a home in 2007. Additionally, they took an equity loan 
to make repairs to the home, they made loans to purchase furniture, and they incurred 
significant additional credit card debt, and obtained at least five small personal loans. 
During the 2007 winter, her spouse was unemployed for an unknown period because 
the ownership in his company changed, and because the harsh winter prevented him 
from working.  
 
Many of Applicant’s delinquent debts are from credit card accounts that became 
delinquent around 2006-2007. During her 2008 interview, she did not know the balance 
on her delinquent accounts. Applicant claimed she has been in contact with the 
creditors and that the accounts are on hold. She presented no documentary evidence to 
corroborate her claims. Applicant’s financial problems appear to be the result of her 
extensive use of her credit and her husband’s inability to work. 
 
Applicant promised to pay all her delinquent debts. She stated she was caught 
up with her bills and was current in paying what she owes. She intends to pay her 
delinquent accounts one at a time, starting by paying the smallest debts first. She 
presented payment receipts for three debts paid around October 2008 (Item 8). Two of 
the debts concerned small personal loans she obtained. Other than these accounts, 
Applicant presented little evidence of other paid debts, settlement agreements, or efforts 
to resolve her delinquent debts since she acquired them.  
 
Applicant believes she can negotiate settlements with all her creditors within two 
years. She considered using a debt consolidation company, but discounted the idea 
because of the additional fees she would have to pay. Applicant believes she is not 
susceptible to blackmail, coercion, or pressure because her family knows about her 
financial problems.  
 
Applicant presented no evidence concerning her current financial situation (i.e., 
salary, deductions, expenses, debts, a working budget), or about how she is going to 
prevent similar financial problems in the future. She presented no evidence that she has 
participated in any financial counseling.  
 
 
4  An applicant’s credit report showing the delinquent debts alleged in an SOR is sufficient to 
establish the government’s prima facie case. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2003). 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). The 
adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, 
which are required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”5 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).6 
 
 
5  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
6  “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant has accumulated seven delinquent and/or charged-off accounts 
totaling approximately $36,000, most of which have been outstanding since around 
2006-2007. Applicant’s evidence of efforts to resolve her financial obligations is limited 
to her payment of three debts around October 2008. Two of the debts concerned small 
personal loans she obtained. Other than these payments, Applicant presented no other 
evidence of efforts to pay or resolve any of the financial obligations alleged in the SOR.  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of 
not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. Her financial problems are ongoing and her evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence to establish circumstances beyond her 
control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, i.e., her and her husband’s periods 
of unemployment. Notwithstanding, her financial problems appear to be the result of her 
extensive use of her credit and her husband’s inability to work for a period. Applicant’s 
evidence of efforts to resolve her financial obligations is limited to her paying three 
debts in 2008, not alleged in the SOR. She presented no other evidence of efforts to 
pay or resolve any of the financial obligations alleged in the SOR. Applicant has been 
consistently employed since November 2004. Her favorable information fails to fully 
establish a track record of financial responsibility. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are not clear indications that her 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. She presented no evidence 
that she received financial counseling. Considering the number of delinquent debts, the 
date the debts were acquired, the aggregate value of the debts, and the lack of 
evidence of efforts to resolve her financial obligations, Applicant’s information is 
insufficient to establish that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. The remaining 
mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for her four years working for 
government contractors. There is no evidence of any security violation, or that she ever 
compromised classified information. Applicant appears to be a valuable employee and a 
good mother and wife. These factors show some responsibility and mitigation. 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. Applicant’s financial problems appear to be 
caused by her extensive use of her credit and her husband’s inability to work. She has 
failed to show good-faith efforts to resolve her financial problems in a timely manner. 
The record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
Formal Findings 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
