 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04977 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 13, 2007. On 
March 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 27, 2009, and answered it on April 30, 
2009. DOHA received his response on May 9, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on June 8, 2009, and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on 
June 11, 2009. It was reassigned to me on July 15, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on July 21, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 18, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
C, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until August 26, 2009, 
to enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX 
D through G, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to 
AX D through G is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on August 24, 2009. The record closed on August 26, 2009. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.q alleged three counts of larceny. Both sides agreed that SOR ¶ 
1.q did not allege a financial concern and would be more appropriately alleged as 
personal conduct under Guideline E. I granted Department Counsel’s motion, without 
objection from Applicant, to amend the SOR by renumbering SOR ¶ 1.q as SOR ¶ 2.a 
under Guideline E (Tr. 96). The amendment is handwritten on the SOR. Applicant 
stated he did not need or desire additional time to prepare his response to the amended 
SOR (Tr. 97). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.g, 
and 1.q (renumbered as ¶ 2.a). His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He was married in August 1999, and has a nine-year-
old child. He and his wife separated in November 2003, but are not divorced (Tr. 31).  
 
Applicant served on active duty in the Army from September 1994 to November 
2003. He held a security clearance while on active duty, but it was withdrawn in January 
2003, after he received nonjudicial punishment under Article 15, Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 815, for wrongful appropriation in violation of 
Article 121, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 921 (GX 7). The misconduct occurred when Applicant 
found a wallet in a parking lot. The wallet contained identification cards, a credit card, 
and $63. He decided to take the cash in the wallet because he needed money. At the 
time, he was the sole support for five people: himself, his wife and their child, and two 
children from his wife’s previous relationship. He kept the cash and discarded the wallet 
and its other contents. After a few hours, he reconsidered, contacted the Military Police, 
and helped them retrieve the wallet (Tr. 34-38). His misconduct also was the basis for 
his administrative discharge from the Army. He received a general discharge under 
honorable conditions (AX E at 2).  
 
 
3 
 
 
 After his discharge in November 2003, Applicant was unemployed until May 
2004. He and his son lived with his parents some of the time and in a friend’s apartment 
some of the time (Tr. 38-40). He then worked at various jobs but was unemployed from 
June to October 2005. He was employed until December 2005 and again unemployed 
until July 2006, when he was hired by a federal contractor as a systems analyst. He 
attended college part-time from August 2005 to March 2006. When he dropped out of 
school, his student loans (SOR ¶ 1.a) became due. He began working as a senior 
computer systems analyst for his current employer in January 2007. He does not have a 
clearance (Tr. 13-14, 24). 
 
 Applicant testified he had negotiated a payment agreement for the tuition debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and he made two or three payments of $150 (Tr. 68). He admitted 
this debt in his answer to the SOR. He did not produce any documentation of the 
payment agreement or his payments at the hearing or in his post-hearing submission.  
 
 The debt for unpaid rent (SOR ¶ 1.b) arose while Applicant was in the Army. He 
terminated his lease when he was reassigned overseas, and he provided his landlord 
with a copy of his orders. The landlord sued, but the lawsuit was dismissed when 
neither party appeared. Applicant was unaware of the lawsuit until he found out there 
was an eviction on his record that made him unable to rent an apartment after he was 
discharged from the Army (Tr. 56). The landlord obtained a second judgment for a 
substantially reduced amount in March 2008, long after Applicant left the Army. The 
original landlord is no longer in business and Applicant has been unable to contact him 
(Tr. 54-59). Applicant has not attempted to negotiate with the collection agency to which 
the debt was referred.  
 
 Applicant testified that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, 1.l, and 
1.m were for accounts opened by his wife in his name and without his permission after 
they separated. He has not disputed any of the debts (Tr. 100-01). The account listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.n was opened by his wife with his permission, and it is unpaid (Tr. 85). He 
testified he placed a security alert on his credit record in 2007, and his wife has not 
been able to open any more accounts in his name (Tr. 89). The security alert is 
reflected on his credit report dated September 15, 2007 (GX 4 at 1).  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e arose when Applicant agreed to pay his parents’ 
utility bill while he was living with them, and he put the account in his name. His parents 
have resumed paying their own utilities, but Applicant has not paid the charges that 
accrued while he was responsible for the account (Tr. 74-75). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a delinquent student loan and is unpaid. 
Applicant admitted this debt in his answer to the SOR. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i was for a video that was not returned (Tr. 79-80). 
Applicant testified the account was resolved, but he presented no documentation at the 
hearing or in his post-hearing submission.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j arose when Applicant’s mother opened an account 
in his name, with his permission, to purchase a washer and dryer. She promised to 
make the payments and told him she was making the minimum payment each month 
(Tr. 80-82). The debt is unresolved. 
 
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a College books 
and fees 
$1,426 Unpaid GX 2 at 2; Tr. 68 
1.b Unpaid Rent $7,197 Judgment entered Mar. 
2008 for $2,312; unpaid 
AX A; Tr. 54-59 
1.c Cable Service $1,113 Wife’s debt; unpaid Tr. 70-71 
1.d Telephone $351 Wife’s debt; unpaid Tr. 72-73 
1.e Utilities $309 Unpaid Tr. 74 
1.f Cell phone $819 Wife’ debt; unpaid Tr. 75-76 
1.g Student loan $2,781 Unpaid Tr. 77-78 
1.h Telephone $307 Wife’s debt; unpaid Tr. 78-79 
1.i Video rental $210 No documentation of 
settlement 
Tr. 79-80 
1.j Credit card $1,810 Unpaid Tr. 80-81 
1.k Cell phone $2,077 Wife’s debt; unpaid Tr. 83-84 
1.l Telephone $383 Wife’s debt; unpaid Tr. 84 
1.m Telephone $78 Wife’s debt; unpaid Tr. 84 
1.n Telephone $477 Unpaid Tr. 85 
1.o Charge account $548 Disputed AX G; Tr. 87-88 
1.p Charge account $274 Disputed AX G 
 
 Applicant currently earns about $52,000 per year, and his net pay is about 
$36,000 to $38,000. He does not own a home or a car. He lives paycheck-to-paycheck. 
He spends about $680 per month for child care and sends his mother $200-$250 every 
two weeks. He is contributing to a retirement account and has about $200 in savings 
(Tr. 46-52). 
 
 Applicant’s parents recently agreed to accept legal custody of his son and care 
for him (Tr. 90-91). This agreement will relieve Applicant of the monthly expenditure of 
$680 for child care. Applicant also is advertising for a roommate to help pay the rent on 
his apartment (Tr. 63-64). He testified he intends to use the additional income to pay off 
his debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
 
5 
 
 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
 
6 
 
 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling about $20,000. Applicant has 
admitted the two largest debts. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 
as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised by an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” 
Applicant’s financial history raises these three disqualifying conditions, shifting the 
burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are numerous and not yet resolved. Some of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.d, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.k -1.m) were incurred by his wife without his knowledge or consent. 
This circumstance is unlikely to recur. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is applicable to the debts 
incurred by his wife without his knowledge or consent. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s unemployment from 
the date of his discharge from the Army in November 2003 until May 2004 was due to 
 
7 
 
 
his own misconduct, but his subsequent periods of unemployment and his wife’s 
fraudulent conduct were beyond his control. He minimized his housing expenses by 
living with parents or friends. He has been continuously employed since July 2006, but 
has made little effort to resolve his financial situation. He has not disputed or resolved 
the debts he attributes to his wife’s fraudulent behavior. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is 
established for the debts incurred by his wife without his knowledge or consent. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought or received 
counseling since his discharge from the Army and his financial problems are not under 
control.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case 
No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that 
an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. Id. 
 
 Applicant testified he was making payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a 
and that the debt to the video store was resolved, but he produced no documentation to 
support his testimony. The remaining debts are unresolved. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
has disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.p and provided documentation of 
the dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) is established for these two debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant wrongfully appropriated another person’s wallet 
and its contents while he was in the Army, and he has admitted this allegation. The 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” 
 
8 
 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to Applicant’s 
dishonest conduct: 
AG ¶ 16(c): [C]redible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
AG ¶ 16(d): [C]redible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information in the 
workplace.  
AG ¶ 16(e): [P]ersonal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
Applicant’s conduct raises all three of these disqualifying conditions.  
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
commander appeared to treat his offense as minor, disposing of it by nonjudicial 
punishment rather than a court-martial. Whether that disposition was in recognition of 
Applicant’s nine years of honorable service cannot be determined from this record. 
Nevertheless, it was an isolated incident that occurred almost nine years ago. Applicant 
has not repeated his dishonest conduct despite his continuing need for additional 
income. Under all the circumstances, his conduct does not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is established.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. He was remorseful for his 
dishonest conduct while in the Army. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on 
his personal conduct, but he has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial 
considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i-1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.p:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
