                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-09058 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
On May 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing May 29, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. I was assigned the case on July 21, 2009. DOHA issued 
the Notice of Appearance on July 31, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
September 3, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open 
until September 17, 2009, to allow Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
documents, which she did. They were marked as AE D through G, which were admitted 
without objection.1 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 14, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, I.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i and 1.j, and denied the remaining allegations. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 23 years old and has worked for a federal contractor as an executive 
assistant since May 2008. She married in 2006. She has two children, ages 5 and 3. 
Her husband is unemployed and has not worked since 2005. He does not receive 
unemployment benefits or any other type of benefits. He does not care for his children 
during the day. The children attend educational programs that do not require a fee. 
Applicant earns about $45,000 annually.2 
  
Applicant admitted owing the loan in SOR ¶ 1.b, but disputed the loan in ¶ 1.a.3 
She disputed the debt with the credit bureau, but did not contact the creditor, and she 
has not received any correspondence from them. She did not provide any 
documentation at her hearing. However, she provided a document after her hearing that 
was submitted to the credit bureau on September 16, 2009, disputing a debt. It is 
unclear if the dispute pertains to SOR ¶1.b. because it is not specifically identified.4  
She stated at her hearing that she took out student loans in either 2007 or 2008. In her 
post-hearing letter she stated that she is now disputing the debts in both ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, 
but failed to provide a basis for the dispute. Both debts are listed on Applicant’s credit 
report. Both loans were opened in 2008. She stated at her hearing that she contacted 
the creditor and asked about the debt in ¶ 1.b, but did not ask about the debt in ¶ 1.a.5  
 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($395) as not hers.6 The debt is for a 
credit card from a retail store. She admits she was an authorized user on an account 
1 AE D is a fax cover sheet and a letter from Applicant; AE E is a copy of a dispute letter to 
Equifax, but it does not address what debt is in dispute. AE F contains pages 1-4 of a 22-page Equifax 
Credit Report; AE G is a two-page document of negative accounts from the Equifax credit file. 
 
2 Tr. 34-39. 
 
3 GE 2 at 3; GE 3 at 2; GE 4 at 2. 
 
4 AE E. 
 
5 Tr. 40-50; GE 2 at 3; GE 3 at 2; GE 4 at 2. 
 
6 GE 3 at 2. 
3 
 
                                                          
she held jointly with her mother. She contacted the creditor and was advised the 
account was in her name, with her date of birth and social security number. There is no 
other name on the account. She was told she would be provided with documentation 
and information on how to dispute the debt. She admitted she had this retailer’s credit 
card and made some charges on it, but does not remember when she made the 
transaction.7 She stated she disputed the debt with the credit bureau. No specific 
documentation was provided.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,081) is from a checking account Applicant had in 
2005. She believed it was an overdrawn account.9 She contacted the creditor three 
weeks ago and they agreed to settle the account for half of the amount. Applicant was 
required to pay $153 initially and then $50 a month. She stated she made the first 
payment and the next payment was due on September 15, 2009. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide proof of the initial payment and make 
another payment and provide proof of that payment. She did not provide proof of either 
payment. Applicant’s post-hearing letter stated that this account was removed from her 
credit report.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($797) is from a checking account Applicant had in 2006. 
She believed it was an overdrawn account.11 She contacted the creditor three weeks 
ago and agreed to settle the account for one-half of the balance. She stated she made 
an initial payment of $120 on August 17, 2009, and then was to pay $75 on September 
15, 2009. The record was held open to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide proof 
of the $120 payment and to pay the $75. She did not provide proof of payments. Her 
post-hearing letter stated that this account was removed from her credit report.12  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($185) is for a cable television account. The account was 
first reported in her credit report in 2002. Applicant disputes this account. She contacted 
the creditor and advised them that she was not old enough to have an account when 
they first reported it as delinquent. She disputed the debt with the credit bureau. No 
documentation was provided, but it is clear she was not old enough to open an account 
in 2002. This debt is resolved.13 
 
7 GE 4 at 3; GE 5 at 4. 
 
8 Tr. 50-53. 
 
9 GE 2 at 6, GE 4 at 4. 
 
10 Tr. 53-56; AE D, F, G. The credit report provided is incomplete. 
 
11 GE 2 at 6; GE 4 at 4; GE 5 at 4. 
 
12 Tr. 56-58; AE D, F, G. The credit report provided is incomplete. 
 
13 Tr. 58-60. 
 
4 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($320) is a cash advance loan incurred in 2007. Applicant 
paid some of the loan back, but then the interest escalated.14 She contacted the creditor 
and agreed to make monthly payments of $50. The record was held open to allow her to 
provide proof that she made a payment. No proof was provided. 15 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($88) is to a bank where Applicant had an account. It was 
a checking account that had overdraft fees.16 She stated she settled the account, paid 
$44, and had proof of the payment. She did not provide proof of payment. She stated in 
her post-hearing letter that the account was removed from her credit report.17 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 2003. She attended college for a period 
of time after high school, but did not earn a degree. She went back to college sometime 
in 2006. She has earned a total of about 40 college credits. She believed that her 
mother was paying for her college in 2003, but is not sure if her mother took out a loan 
in her name for her college expenses. Applicant asked her mother about the account 
and her mother could not remember the debt. Applicant stated she could not remember 
it either. She contacted the creditor about the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i and has set up a 
payment plan to pay $50 a month toward the debt. She made her first payment in 
August 2009. Although she thought her mother was paying her tuition, the loan is in 
Applicant’s name.18 Her 2008 tax refund was applied to student loan debt. She believes 
$4,000 was applied. No proof was provided regarding the payment plan or that she has 
made any payments.19 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($305) is for phone services. Applicant stated she paid the 
account in June 2009, and had documents to show she is current in paying her bill. The 
record was held open to allow her an opportunity to provide the document. She did not. 
She stated in her post-hearing letter that the account was removed from her credit 
report.20  
 
 Applicant does not own a car. She does not have any money in her savings 
account, and has a nominal amount in her checking account. She does not contribute to 
a retirement plan. She has not had financial counseling. She filed her taxes on time. 
She has no other debts. She does not have credit cards. She is trying to support her 
14 GE 3 at 2; GE 4 at 5. 
 
15 Tr. 60-63; AE D, F, G. The credit report provided is incomplete. 
 
 
16 GE 2 at 7; GE 4 at 5. 
 
17 Tr. 63-64; AE D, F, G. The credit report provided is incomplete. 
 
18 GE 3 at 2; GE 4 at 2. 
 
19 Tr. 25-33. 
 
20 Tr. 64-65; AE D, F, G. The credit report provided is incomplete. 
 
5 
 
                                                          
family and did not address her debts sooner because she did not have the money to do 
so.21  
 
 Applicant stated in her post-hearing letter that her husband has a job offer and 
will start working on September 22, 2009, and she has accepted a part-time job. She is 
attempting to take control over her financial situation and believes that with the 
additional income, there will be change.22 
 
 Applicant provided character letters from people who believe she is a trustworthy 
person, a good role model, intelligent and a spiritual woman.23 She volunteers in her 
community and is considered dependable, organized, efficient, and has excellent 
communication skills.24 She is also considered hard-working and an excellent wife, 
parent and friend. She is considered a good person who deserves a chance to better 
herself.25 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
21 Tr. 67-68. 
 
22 AE D. 
 
23 AE A. 
 
24 AE B. 
 
25 AE C. 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
7 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has approximately $13,687 in delinquent debt that remains unresolved 
or unpaid. She made statements that some of her debts were paid, and others were 
settled. She was making payments on some debts, and others she disputed. She did 
not provide documents to support her statements, even though the record was held 
open for this purpose. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant did not provide proof that she made payments on any of her debts or 
that she has resolved her debts. She admitted certain debts and then later disputed 
them, but did not explain why she did not owe the debts. The delinquent debts remain a 
concern because they have not been resolved. Applicant stated she had made 
payments on some of the debts and had upcoming payments due to settle the debts. 
Despite leaving the record open to allow her to provide proof of her past payments and 
to show consistent good-faith payments, she did not. She stated certain debts had 
dropped off of her credit report, but she did not provide a complete credit report or 
explain why they were no longer listed. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant appears to be a hard worker who is attempting to support her whole 
family on one income. It appears there were periods of time when she was 
underemployed and had financial difficulty. Mitigating condition (b) partially applies 
8 
 
because she was underemployed. However, for full application of the mitigating 
condition, she must show she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
stated she was making payments on certain debts and admitted owing many of the 
debts. She did not provide proof of her payments. She stated many of the debts were 
no longer on her credit report, but she failed to provide a complete credit report or 
explain why they were no longer included. Therefore, I find she did not act responsibly 
under the circumstances. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. She failed to 
provide documented proof that she has initiated a good-faith effort to resolve her debts. 
She failed to provide proof that the problems are being resolved or under control. She 
did not provide a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of her debts. Although she 
provided a document from the credit bureau that disputes a debt, it does not detail what 
debt it applies to and she did not provide information as to why she disputed it. I find 
none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are:  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although Applicant receives high 
praise from those who provided character letters, she has numerous delinquent debts. 
She has not taken enough initiative to resolve the debts. She made statements about 
what she did to settle some debts, but did not provide proof of her actions. She has 
outstanding student loans, but does not appear to know their status. She stated she had 
negotiated settlement agreements on some debts and was making payments, but did 
not provide proof, despite being given additional time. The burden is on Applicant to 
show proof of her payments. She did not meet this burden. Undoubtedly, Applicant is a 
hard-working mother who is trying to improve herself. She provided a post-hearing letter 
stating she was going to start a part-time job and her husband was going to work. 
9 
 
These are steps in the right direction, but until she proves she has resolved some of her 
debts and has a consistent track record regarding her financial situation, it is too early to 
conclude her finances are not a concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g-1.j:  Against Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
