                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10008 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen L. Voelker, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s use of methamphetamine from May 2005 to January 2007 is not 
mitigated by his two-year abstinence while under probation. At this time, the passage of 
time is not sufficient to show reliability, judgment, and willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 15, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns 
under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or revoked. 
 
On April 7, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 28, 2009. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on June 23, 2009. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 13). Applicant testified on his own 
behalf, presented two witnesses, and submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1 (with Tabs A 
through N), which were admitted without objection (Tr. 23). DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 6, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR’s factual allegations, except for SOR ¶ 2.a, which he 
denied. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old project manager working for a defense contractor. He 
graduated from college in 1999. He then joined the U.S. Navy Officer Candidate School 
program and became a naval aviator. He displayed flight and academic excellence and 
received two training commendations in recognition of his outstanding performance. He 
served in the Navy from March 2000 to March 2005, and achieved the rank of 
Lieutenant (0-3). He was awarded a Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal for 
superior performance. In November 2003, he lost his flying qualifications due to a 
number of flying incidents. He was involuntarily discharged from the Navy in March 
2005. His service was characterized as honorable.  
 
Applicant started law school in August 2005, and received his law degree in May 
2008. He received an award for being the most outstanding third-year law student in the 
school’s clinic program. He has not taken his bar exam. Applicant presented numerous 
impressive character letters from fellow Navy officers and law school students, as well 
as a law school professor. All of his references consider Applicant to be honest, 
trustworthy, and of high moral character. He was commended for his judgment, 
 
1  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
maturity, outstanding work ethic, and overall performance. All of his references 
recommended he receive access to classified information without reservations. 
 
He married his first wife in October 2001. They separated in 2004, because of 
her mental problems, alcohol abuse, and infidelity, and they were divorced in August 
2005. Applicant met his current wife through the Internet around May 2005. Applicant 
married his wife in December 2007. He has no children. 
 
Applicant illegally used methamphetamine ten times from approximately May 
2005 to January 1, 2007. He used methamphetamine twice a day on five different 
occasions. Methamphetamine is a highly addictive, illegal drug. He used 
methamphetamine twice in May 2005, while visiting his twin brother living in another 
state (Tr. 94). Applicant’s brother is the supplier of all the methamphetamine Applicant 
consumed. He visited his brother to acquire and use the methamphetamine. Applicant 
used the methamphetamine to avoid feeling tired and to be able to consume more 
alcohol while partying with his brother. His use of methamphetamine was knowing, 
deliberate, and premeditated. Applicant claimed he did not use illegal drugs while in 
college or in the Navy because he knew the use of drugs was illegal and he did not 
want to lose his career (Tr. 163). 
 
In May 2005, Applicant brought methamphetamine back with him on his return 
flight home. He consumed the methamphetamine in December 2005, to avoid feeling 
tired and to be able to consume more alcohol (Tr. 95). He used methamphetamine twice 
the same day. While attending law school, Applicant visited his twin brother during the 
2006 spring break and in November 2006 (Tr. 97). On both occasions, he used 
methamphetamine with his brother under similar circumstances as those during May 
2005 and December 2005. Applicant brought methamphetamine back with him on his 
return flight home in November 2006. He consumed the methamphetamine around late 
December 2006 to early January 2007 at a holiday party (Tr. 101). 
 
Applicant told his wife (then girlfriend) about his use of methamphetamine in May 
2005. He also told her about the other four times he used methamphetamine. She has 
never used illegal drugs, and she discouraged him and advised Applicant against using 
illegal drugs. Applicant disregarded his wife’s advice because he believed he did not 
have a drug problem, would not get addicted to methamphetamine, and would not get 
caught by law enforcement. 
 
In February 2007, Applicant sent $200 to his twin brother living in another state 
and asked him to mail Applicant some methamphetamine (Tr. 137). His brother mailed 
him 1.9 grams of methamphetamine. The shipment of the illegal drug was discovered 
by law enforcement personnel. In May 2007, Applicant was charged with unlawful 
methamphetamine conspiracy, a felony. In September 2007, pursuant to a plea 
agreement, Applicant pled guilty to an amended charge of illegal possession of 
methamphetamine in exchange for a sentence of 24 months probation with deferred 
judgment (in part). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant decided he would never use drugs again when he saw the police 
officers coming into his home in February 2007 (Tr. 147). As a result of this incident, 
Applicant realized he had not exercised good judgment. He believes this is not the type 
of future he envisioned for himself and his wife. Between July 2007 and December 
2007, at the suggestion of his wife, Applicant underwent grief counseling to identify the 
root of his bad decisions. Applicant believes his use of methamphetamine was a way of 
him coping with the devastating losses he suffered in a relatively short period, i.e., in 
2003, he lost his flight status; he had marital problems in 2004, and divorced his first 
wife in August 2006; he was involuntarily discharged from the Navy in 2005; his twin 
brother was diagnosed with AIDS in 2004; he was very close to his grandmother and 
she died in February 2005; and his older brother died in June 2006 of AIDS. Applicant 
had problems coping with all these setbacks and was not able to talk to others about his 
personal problems. 
 
In September 2007, the court required Applicant to undergo a drug assessment. 
The state counselor concluded Applicant was not drug dependent and recommended 
no further drug counseling (Tr. 120). She recommended, however, that Applicant 
continue his grief counseling. During the course of his probation, Applicant took three 
drug tests, all of which came back negative for illegal drugs. Applicant successfully 
completed his 24-month probation with all of its requirements. 
 
Since February 2007, Applicant has had limited interaction with his brother. He 
has not been back to his brother’s home since December 2006. He had contact with his 
brother in July 2007 (Tr. 140) and December 2008, at his parent’s home, and his 
brother visited Applicant’s home in July and November 2008 (Tr. 124). Applicant tries to 
control the environment and circumstances under which he meets with his brother to 
prevent exposing himself to illegal drugs. To his knowledge, his brother continues to 
abuse illegal drugs. 
 
Applicant started working for his current employer, a government contractor, in 
June 2008. His direct supervisor is the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and part-owner of 
the company. The CEO and Applicant have weekly phone contact and monthly personal 
contact (Tr. 24-34). In his opinion, Applicant is doing an outstanding job. Applicant is 
performing beyond all expectations and a promotion is pending. The customer (a 
government agency) is well pleased with Applicant’s performance and recommended 
his promotion. Applicant received a monetary award and a letter of commendation for 
his outstanding job performance.  
 
The CEO is aware of all the SOR allegations against Applicant. He believes 
Applicant made some bad decisions and exercised poor judgment. Applicant disclosed 
his drug use and criminal charges in detail in his security clearance application and 
discussed his problems with the CEO. The CEO considers Applicant to be honest, 
truthful, and reliable. He recommended Applicant receive access to classified 
information without reservations. Applicant has been handling a $25 million dollar 
contract for the company with great success and is well liked by the client.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for all of his illegal behavior. He was candid and 
forthcoming explaining the circumstances surrounding his and his brother’s use of 
drugs, the stress he underwent during the criminal proceedings against him, and the 
shame and embarrassment he felt. He believes that many of his law school fellow 
students became aware of his legal situation. He understands that for him to achieve his 
goals in life there is no room in his future for drugs or any illegal activity. Applicant 
signed a statement of intent in which he promised never to use illegal drugs again (Tr. 
128; AE 1, Tab N).  
 
Applicant believes he has learned his lesson and is rehabilitated. Since his 
criminal activity, he moved to a different state, married his wife, graduated from law 
school, and has been successfully working for a government contractor. Applicant 
intends to continue his contacts with his brother, but under circumstances where 
Applicant can control the circumstances and situation of their meetings. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
 
6 
 
 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 Between May 2005 and January 2007, Applicant knowingly and deliberately used 
methamphetamine approximately 10 times. He used methamphetamine twice a day on 
five different occasions. Applicant traveled by airplane to visit his brother in another 
state and to acquire and use the methamphetamine. On three occasions, Applicant 
brought back methamphetamine in the airplane to use at home at a later time. 
Furthermore, Applicant purchased 1.9 grams of methamphetamine from his brother and 
had it mailed to him across interstate lines. He was charged with unlawful 
methamphetamine conspiracy. He pled guilty to an amended charge of illegal 
possession of methamphetamine. Applicant’s drug-related behavior violated state and 
federal criminal laws. 
 
Applicant’s behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of criminal 
 
7 
 
 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.”  
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find that AG ¶¶ 32 (a) and (d) 
partially apply. Applicant’s last use of methamphetamine was in January 2007; his last 
criminal behavior occurred in February 2007; and he pled guilty to unlawful possession 
of methamphetamine in September 2007. As such his criminal behavior may be 
considered somewhat remote. 
 
 Applicant averred his criminal behavior was caused by unusual circumstances 
and that it is unlikely to recur. He claimed he used methamphetamine to cope with the 
devastating losses he suffered in a relatively short period, i.e., losing his flight status in 
2003; the 2004 diagnosis of his twin brother with AIDS; the marital problems in 2004 
that led to his divorce from his first wife in 2006; his involuntary discharge from the Navy 
in 2005; the death of his grandmother in 2005; and the death of his older brother to 
AIDS in 2006.  
 
 Since July 2007, Applicant successfully underwent grief counseling, participated 
in a state-sponsored drug assessment that indicated he is not drug dependent, 
successfully completed his 24-month probation, purchased a home, married his current 
wife, graduated from law school, and has been highly successful working for a 
government contractor. There is no evidence that Applicant has been involved in any 
additional drug-related incidents or any other misconduct after February 2007. He was 
candid in his responses to the security clearance application questions, to his 
supervisor’s questions, and at his hearing when discussing the circumstances 
surrounding his drug-related offenses. I find this evidence weighs towards a finding of 
successful rehabilitation, but does not fully mitigate the Guideline J security concerns. 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a): “any drug abuse;”2 and AG ¶ 25(c): “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia.”  
 
Between May 2005 and January 2007, Appellant illegally used and possessed 
methamphetamine approximately 10 times. He used methamphetamine twice a day in 
five different occasions. Applicant traveled by airplane to visit his brother in another 
state and to use and acquire the methamphetamine. On three occasions, Applicant 
brought back methamphetamine in the airplane to his home state to use it at a later 
time. Furthermore, Applicant purchased 1.9 grams of methamphetamine from his 
brother and had it mailed to him across interstate lines. His behavior triggers the 
applicability of AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c).3 The other disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 
25 are not applicable.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
 
2  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3  AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Cocaine and methamphetamine are Schedule II Controlled Substances. See 21 U.S.C § 
812(c)II(a)(4) (cocaine), and II(c) (methamphetamine); United States v. McCourty, 562 F.3d 458 (2nd Cir. 
2008) (cocaine); United States v. Wheeler, 535 F.3d 446 (6th Cir. 2008) (methamphetamine).  
 
 
9 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
AG ¶¶ 26 (a) and (b) are partially established by the record evidence. Applicant’s 
illegal use of methamphetamine is somewhat remote. His last possession and use of 
methamphetamine was in January 2007, and his last drug-related misconduct was in 
February 2007. Because Applicant used methamphetamine ten times (twice in five 
different occasions) between May 2005 and January 2007, I do not find his use was 
infrequent.  
 
Applicant averred his use of methamphetamine occurred under unusual 
circumstances and it is unlikely to recur. He believes his use of methamphetamine was 
a way to cope with the devastating losses he suffered in a relatively short period, i.e., in 
2003, he lost his flight status and his naval career in 2005; he had marital problems in 
2004, and divorced his first wife in August 2006; his twin brother was diagnosed with 
AIDS in 2004; he was very close to his grandmother and she died in February 2005; and 
his older brother died in June 2006. Applicant had problems coping with all these 
setbacks and talking to people about his personal problems. 
 
I disagree with the conclusion that Applicant’s use of methamphetamine occurred 
under unusual circumstances and it is unlikely to recur. Applicant did not use illegal 
drugs while in college or in the Navy because he was concerned its use would adversely 
affect his career. In May 2005, when he used methamphetamine for the first time, he 
was 32 years old. He had just been discharged from the Navy after serving 
approximately five years as an officer and naval aviator. He was about to start law 
 
10 
 
 
school. Applicant knew the use of methamphetamine was illegal and dangerous to his 
health.  
 
AG ¶ 26(b)(1)-26(b)(4) are partially established by the evidence. Applicant intends 
to continue having contact with his twin brother, who was the source of all of Applicant’s 
methamphetamine and who used the illegal drug with Applicant. To Applicant’s 
knowledge, his brother is still using illegal drugs. Applicant claimed he has somewhat 
disassociated from his brother by controlling the circumstances under which they meet. 
He has not visited his brother at his home and has not been in parties with him to avoid 
the environment in which the methamphetamine was used.  
 
Applicant receives credit for his two-year period of abstinence while on probation, 
his successful grief counseling, and for his positive drug assessment. He also receives 
full credit for his signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant told his girlfriend (now his wife) about his use of methamphetamine 
every time he used it. She was opposed to his use of methamphetamine and advised 
him against using it. Notwithstanding, Applicant deliberately sought out the use of 
methamphetamine. He visited his brother in another state where he acquired and used 
methamphetamine. Additionally, he brought methamphetamine with him in the plane for 
later use. Moreover, Applicant purchased methamphetamine from his brother and had it 
mailed to his home. 
 
Considering all the facts and the timelines of Applicant’s use of 
methamphetamine and the losses he suffered, I do not find his use of 
methamphetamine occurred under such unusual circumstances as to make it unlikely 
that he would use methamphetamine again. I find the drug involvement concerns are not 
mitigated. In reaching my conclusion, I also considered Applicant’s statement of intent 
not to use illegal drugs again, his limited association with his brother, and Applicant’s 
period of abstinence.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and well-
educated man. He served honorably for five years in the Navy as an officer and naval 
aviator. He has been very successful working for a defense contractor. He has 
established a reputation as a valuable, dedicated and reliable employee. There is no 
evidence he has ever compromised classified information or committed any security 
violations. Applicant expressed remorse for his questionable behavior and seems 
resolute in remaining abstinent. He successfully completed his grief counseling, and his 
drug assessment determined he is not drug dependent. Additionally, Applicant is 
married and in a stable relationship. He has been drug abstinent since January 2007, 
and promised never to use illegal drugs again. These factors show responsibility, good 
judgment, and mitigation. 
 
On the other hand, Applicant acted deliberately and with premeditation in his use 
of methamphetamine notwithstanding his knowledge of the illegality of his actions and 
the risks associated with it. He continued his use of methamphetamine even though his 
wife asked him not to use illegal drugs. Applicant’s bold disregard for the law escalated 
to the point of him ordering methamphetamine to be delivered to him through the mail. 
He compromised himself and his brother. It is questionable whether Applicant would 
have discontinued his methamphetamine use but for his being discovered and 
prosecuted. 
 
On balance, I conclude that, at this time, Applicant’s favorable evidence is 
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and drug 
involvement. Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, Applicant’s two-
year abstinence while under probation is not sufficient to show reliability, judgment, and 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. Overall, the record evidence fails to 
convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  
 Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
