                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-10667  
    ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on July 12, 2007, and again on March 9, 2009, to request a security clearance 
required as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results 
of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On May 5, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 
1) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on May 17, 2009. He signed a notarized Answer on 
June 1, 2009, and requested a decision without a hearing. In his Answer, Applicant 
admitted to all allegations in the SOR. On July 21, 2009, DOHA Department Counsel 
submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM) in support of the government’s preliminary 
decision to deny Applicant's request to be granted a security clearance. The FORM 
contained six documents, identified as Items 1 through 6. The FORM and attached 
Items were forwarded to Applicant on July 22, 2009, and he received the package on 
August 6, 2009. Applicant was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to 
respond. He timely responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
September 3, 2009, for an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to the People’s Republic of China (PRC). The request, along with 15 documents 
pertaining to the PRC, are included in the FORM as Items I through XV. The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not 
subject to reasonable dispute and are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 36 years old, joined the U.S. Marine Corps in 1992 and attained the 
rank of sergeant. He completed a security clearance application in 1996 (Item 6) and 
held a Secret clearance starting in 1997. He was honorably discharged in 2005. He has 
been employed by a defense contractor since that time, holding the position of technical 
controller. His job requires him to live overseas and, since 2005, he has lived in the 
United Arab Emirates (UAE) (Items 4, 6). 
 
In April 2005, Applicant met a Chinese woman at a bar in the UAE. They had 
what he describes as a “one-night stand” the night they met. He returned to the bar in 
order to meet her again. During two of their encounters, he paid her for sex. “At his 
behest, their dating ended up leading to cohabitation…” in May or June 2005. Several 
months later, she informed Applicant that she was married and her husband was in 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
3 
 
 
China. She stated that he abused her and she came to the UAE to get away from him 
and to find employment. She left her daughter in China with her husband and mother. 
She obtained a divorce in November 2006 (Item 5). 
 
 
After Applicant and the woman began living together, she did not work as a 
prostitute, and she has told him that she was not a prostitute. She is no longer 
employed outside the home. Several of her friends, who are prostitutes, have visited 
them at their home. Applicant has encouraged her to dissociate herself from these 
friends. Applicant informed his on-site supervisor and program manager about his 
relationship. He did not inform the company security officer of his cohabitation with a 
foreign national until September 2006. He states that he did not know he was required 
to do so, and he followed what he thought at the time was correct procedure by 
informing his chain of command (Item 5). 
 
Applicant and the Chinese citizen married in March 2007, and they currently live 
together in the UAE. His wife’s mother and 14-year-old daughter are citizens of the PRC 
and live there. His wife has siblings, but Applicant was unable to provide information 
about them on his security clearance application (Items 4, 5).  
 
Applicant's mother-in-law is a farmer. His interaction with her and his 
stepdaughter is limited because of the language barrier. Between 2007 and 2008, his 
wife traveled to China to see her family four times: February 2007, Spring 2007, and 
February 2008 and September 2008. She usually stays two to four weeks. Applicant 
pays for her trips. Between September and October 2008, Applicant traveled to China 
with his wife. He informed the company security office of this trip in advance, and 
checked if there were any requirements to be met. He was told to register his visit with 
the U.S. Embassy in China. He states that, “While on this trip I was unable to locate the 
US Embassy, and therefore did not register my trip.” During the trip, he met his 
stepdaughter and other relatives. The record does not state whether or not he met his 
spouse’s siblings, and does not provide any information as to their occupations (Item 5). 
 
Applicant’s spouse bought her mother and daughter an apartment in China in 
December 2007 at a cost of approximately $25,000. Applicant contributed $4,000 to 
help with installing required fixtures and furnishings in the apartment. In his 
Interrogatory response, he referred to it as “our apartment.” The house was purchased 
so that Applicant's spouse would have a place to stay on her future trips to China. The 
title is solely in the name of Applicant's spouse. Applicant believes that Chinese law 
prohibits him, as a foreigner, from having title to the property. According to Applicant, 
Chinese citizens have a “family book” that lists members of each family. Applicant 
states that his wife believes he will have to obtain a “Chinese Residency Visa or most 
likely Chinese Citizenship to get me listed in said ‘family book’.” It is unclear whether 
Applicant intends to seek inclusion in his wife’s “family book.” (Item 5). 
 
 Applicant's wife has a bank account in China. She keeps funds there for her 
mother to withdraw to support herself and the stepdaughter. As of March 2008, it 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
contained about $2,000. Applicant's name is not on the account, and he maintains that 
he cannot obtain information about it or make withdrawals. However, he can and does 
make deposits through wire transfers from the UAE. During his trip to China in 
September 2008, he asked the bank to enable him to wire funds directly from his U.S. 
bank account to the Chinese account so that he could avoid the extra fees charged for 
the UAE wire transfers (Item 5). 
 
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
 
 The PRC has an authoritarian government dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party, which ensures that party and state policy guidance is followed.2 
Openness and economic reform have increased, and foreign journalists were allowed 
greater freedom during the Olympic Games. In addition, the United States and China 
have cooperated in some areas, including various law enforcement matters, 
transnational health issues, and threats posed by North Korea’s and Iran’s nuclear 
programs.  
 
 However. according to the State Department’s 2008 Human Rights Report, the 
Chinese government’s human rights record remained poor and worsened in some 
areas. The government engaged in harassment, detention, and imprisonment of those 
perceived as threatening to the government, as well as unlawful killings by security 
forces, physical abuse and torture of prisoners, and denial of fair public trials. 
Authorities monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, text messages, 
and internet and email communications. Security services routinely monitored and 
entered residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, and fax 
machines. In 2009, the State Department warned that foreign visitors may be placed 
under surveillance, hotel rooms and telephones may be monitored, and personal 
possessions may be searched without the traveler’s knowledge or consent. In addition, 
Americans in China, including those staying with relatives or friends, must register with 
local police when they arrive. 
 
 The PRC possesses large military forces that are transforming into a smaller, 
more mobile high-tech military. Civil-military integration has led to increase use of 
commercial systems in military applications. The PRC has aggressively targeted 
sensitive and protected U.S. economic and militarily critical information subject to export 
control laws. The PRC blends intelligence and non-intelligence assets, relying on covert 
espionage activity by personnel from government ministries, commissions, institutes, 
and military industries independent of the PRC intelligence services, and by targeting 
ethnic Chinese who have access to sensitive information. Americans of Chinese 
ancestry are considered prime intelligence targets. 
 
 Among the record number of countries (108) that engaged in collection efforts 
against the United States in 2005, the PRC was among the most aggressive. Ethnic 
Chinese with U.S. citizenship and/or legal residency have been convicted of procuring 
2 The facts cited derive from the documents submitted by Department Counsel, identified as I through XV. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
and exporting or attempting to export sensitive U.S. technology to the PRC. U.S. 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials have rated China’s espionage and 
industrial theft activities as the leading threat to the security of U.S. technology. The 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission’s 2007 Report to Congress 
concluded that Chinese espionage activities in the United States are so extensive that 
they comprise the single greatest risk to the security of U.S. technologies. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).3 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline B. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.6 
 
 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 The possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country 
is not, of itself, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, the country in question must 
be considered and, in particular, whether or not that country targets United States 
citizens to obtain protected information. The PRC is an active collector of such 
information, and so presents a heightened risk of exploitation, manipulation, or 
coercion.7 Applicant and his wife share living quarters. He has family members who are 
citizens and residents of the PRC. He has helped his foreign relatives by providing 
$4,000 to purchase and furnish an apartment for them in China. His wife maintains a 
7 ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
7 
 
 
bank account in China so that her mother can withdraw cash to support herself and 
Applicant's stepdaughter. Applicant transfers funds to this account in China, and is 
trying to establish a direct link between his U.S. account and her Chinese account to 
make such transfers easier. Applicant's relationship with his wife, and his demonstrated 
ties of obligation to his Chinese relatives, represent a heightened risk of exploitation, 
and support application of AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (d).  
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 It cannot confidently be predicted that Applicant would not be placed in a position 
that could force him to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. He is bound by 
strong ties of affection to his wife, a citizen of a country that routinely targets U.S. 
interests to obtain sensitive information. Applicant has not presented information that 
would show his foreign relatives could not be subject to coercion that would force him to 
choose between their interests and those of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) cannot be 
applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered Applicant's 13 years of 
honorable military service, and his continued service to the government through 
employment with a defense contractor. However, Applicant's current situation must be 
evaluated as well. Nothing in the record establishes Applicant's current ties to the 
United States. He has lived outside the United States for four years, and there is no 
evidence concerning U.S. family, property, or other indications of strong ties to the 
United States. Within weeks of arriving in the UAE, he had established a liaison with a 
 
8 
 
 
foreign national, and sought to continue it, despite having a security clearance at the 
time. He contributed to the purchase of foreign property, and he seeks to link his U.S. 
bank account with a Chinese account. It is unclear whether he plans to conform to 
Chinese law by meeting the requirements for him to be entered in his wife’s “family 
book,” which might entail his obtaining a Chinese visa. His ties to his current wife and 
her family are more current and obvious than his ties to the United States, and it cannot 
be determined, based on these facts that any conflict of interest would be resolved in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s contacts with his wife’s foreign family appear to be casual, as they 
speak different languages and cannot communicate with each other. However, his 
willingness to provide several thousand dollars to help purchase a home for them, and 
his wish to continue depositing funds to his wife’s account in China that is used to 
support them, indicates that he has a sense of obligation to them. Given these facts, 
foreign influence that would sway Applicant in their favor cannot be ruled out. AG ¶ 8(c) 
does not mitigate Applicant’s situation.  
 
 Applicant failed to inform his security officer until he had been cohabitating with a 
foreign national for almost one-and-one-half years. He claims that he had no knowledge 
that he had to inform the company security officer. However, he informed his chain of 
command of his relationship, which offers some mitigation under AG ¶ 8(e). However, 
this mitigation is insufficient to outweigh the unmitigated facts that raise security 
concerns. I find against Applicant on Guideline B. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
9 
 
 
 
When Applicant began a relationship with his wife, a foreign national, he was 31 
years old. He was a mature, responsible adult who had served 13 years in the Marine 
Corps and had held a security clearance since 1997. Despite his experience and 
knowledge of the obligations imposed on those who hold security clearances, he began 
and continued an intimate relationship with a foreign national, raising serious questions 
as to his trustworthiness and good judgment. The relationship continues and his 
involvement with Applicant's Chinese family has increased over time. Within the past 
year, he has traveled to China to meet his foreign relatives. He has provided funds to 
help them purchase and furnish a home. There is every indication that the relationship 
with these family members will continue, as demonstrated by Applicant's and his wife’s 
intent to use the home when she visits China in the future. Moreover, Applicant's close 
and ongoing relationship is with foreign nationals of China, a country whose aggressive 
targeting of sensitive United States information poses a heightened risk of exploitation.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.e.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
