 Counsel for Applicant withdrew from this case after the hearing.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-10576
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Cate O’Callahan, Esquire1
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On May 15, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions
(SF 86) to renew a security clearance required for his job with a defense contractor.
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue2
Applicant’s access to classified information. On February 11, 2009, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
 The revised Adjudicative Guidelines were approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and were3
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
2
addressed in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline J (criminal3
conduct) and Guideline D (sexual behavior).
On March 20, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on May 7, 2009. I convened a hearing on June 10, 2009,
at which the parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented seven exhibits
(Gx. 1 - 7), which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, proffered four
exhibits (Ax. A - D), and presented five witnesses. DOHA received the transcript of
hearing (Tr.) on July 1, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline J, the government alleged Applicant was arrested on August 2,
2005, and charged with Solicitation of a Child by Computer to Commit an Unlawful Sex
Act, a felony; that on August 7, 2006, he pleaded guilty to Attempted Solicitation of a
Child by Computer to Commit an Unlawful Sex Act, a misdemeanor, for which he was
sentenced to 90 days in jail (suspended), placed on 36 months of supervised probation,
was assessed a fine and court costs, and was ordered to complete counseling and
treatment, and to have no contact with the victim or the victim’s family.  (SOR ¶ 1.a) The
government also alleged that Applicant’s probation was to run through August 6, 2009.
(SOR ¶ 1.b)
Under Guideline J, the government also alleged that Applicant pleaded nolo
contendere to a misdemeanor loitering and prowling charge in 1992, when he was 18
years old. (SOR ¶ 1.c) However, at the hearing, Department Counsel indicated there
would be no information presented about this allegation. (Tr. 13) Accordingly, that
allegation is resolved for the Applicant.
Under Guideline D, the government alleged the same information as contained in
SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant admitted both SOR allegations under Guideline J, but did not
directly respond to the allegation under Guideline D. After reviewing the pleadings, the
transcript, and exhibits, I have made the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 36 years old. He served in the U.S. Army Special Forces from
January 1993 until he received a General Discharge under Honorable Conditions in
September 2007. He was hired by his current employer in May 2008. (Gx. 1) Several
witnesses from his company testified in glowing terms about Applicant’s performance
and reliability. The company co-owner stated that he has been “a model employee” who
has exhibited “exemplary judgment” during his tenure there. (Tr. 54) While on active
duty, Applicant distinguished himself in combat during the early days of Operation Iraqi
Freedom in 2003. (Ax. D)
Applicant has been married twice. He and his current wife were married in June
2002 and are raising her 10-year-old child from a previous marriage. Applicant’s first
3
marriage began in January 1997 and ended through divorce in January 2001. Applicant
and his first wife had one child (now age 9) together. (Gx. 1; Tr. 98 - 100) During the
later stages of his first marriage, Applicant suspected his ex-wife was having an affair.
To confirm his suspicions, Applicant began contacting her using his internet service
provider’s instant messaging (IM) program, a near real-time on-line “chatroom,” to pose
as someone else, ostensibly so he might trick her into an admission of adulterous
conduct. While he was unsuccessful in that effort, Applicant became a habitual user of
IM to chat with all manner of people on the internet. (Gx. 5)
In April 2005, Applicant initiated an on-line IM conversation with an 11-year-old
girl. He estimates that he and the girl chatted had at least 30 IM conversations between
April and late July 2005. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 115 - 118) At least three times (on May
12, May 23, and June 27, 2005), Applicant asked the girl if she wanted him to perform
oral sex on her or if she wanted to do the same for him. (Gx. 3) He also attempted to
arrange a meeting with the girl at least three times. (Gx. 3; Tr. 116 - 117)  At some
point, the girl’s mother became aware of the sexual nature of Applicant’s conversation
and called the police. In July 2005, while he was unknowingly communicating with a
parent or a law enforcement officer instead of the child, Applicant arranged what he
thought would be a meeting with the girl, but no meeting actually happened. On August
2, 2005, police executed a search warrant at Applicant’s house and he was arrested. He
was initially charged with Solicitation of a Child by Computer to Commit an Unlawful Sex
Act, a felony. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 5)
A year later, Applicant negotiated a plea bargain through which he pleaded guilty
to the lesser included misdemeanor offense of attempting the same offense. He was
given a suspended 90-day jail sentence and placed on supervised probation for 36
months. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 1) He completed his probation on August 6, 2009. (Tr.
123; Gx. 4) He was also ordered to complete counseling and therapy, which he did after
attending group sessions between November 2006 and August 2008. (Ax. B; Ax. C; Tr.
106 - 107) As a result of his conviction, Applicant was administratively discharged from
the Army despite the fact an earlier administrative separation board around the time of
his arrest recommended he be retained in the service. (Gx. 5; Tr. 95, 102 - 105)
Applicant’s witnesses testified they were aware of his arrest and conviction. He
spoke with three of them about details of his arrest, but it appears he told them that he
thought the person on the other end of his IM chats was an adult (Tr. 44 - 45, 56 - 57,
67 - 68) He also told a government investigator during his background investigation that
he thought he was conversing with an adult. He has also suggested that he never
intended to meet anyone and that he was interested in “role-playing entertainment.” (Tr.
95 - 96, 125; Gx. 5) However, a transcript of his IM chats with the victim shows that he
knew and was attracted by the fact she was a minor. For example, on April 5, 2005,
Applicant asked how old she was and was told she was “11.” That day, the girl’s mother
was also present with the girl and the conversation was benign. On May 12, 2005, he
again confirmed she was 11 years old and, after being told her mother was not home,
asked the girl if she liked oral sex. The session that day ended when the girl indicated
her father was home. On June 27, 2005, after being told the girl’s mother was not home,
he again suggested he wanted to perform oral sex on her. (Gx. 3) Finally, Applicant
knew at the time what he was doing was illegal and inappropriate. On June 29, 2005,
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
4
Applicant said, “[M]y wife would not like me talking to a hot little [sic] 11y/o...you can’t
tell ANYONE!” (Gx. 3; emphasis in original)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies5
in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole
person” concept, those factors are:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 12 (Guideline D - Sexual Behavior) and AG ¶ 30
(Guideline J - Criminal Conduct). 
The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute,
extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who has access6
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based
on trust and confidence. Thus, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring
each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one
who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
5
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.7
Analysis
Criminal Conduct
The security concern raised by the allegation about possible criminal conduct by
the Applicant is that such conduct “creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30.
The government’s information is sufficient to show, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, that
Applicant was charged with a felony sexual crime and was convicted of a lesser
included misdemeanor offense of attempting the same sexual crime. He was given a
suspended jail sentence and was placed on supervised probation for three years. The
record requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 31(a) (a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted). 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant was still on probation as alleged in SOR ¶
1.b. This would require application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 31(d)
(individual is currently on parole or probation). However, his probation was scheduled to
end on August 6, 2009, while this decision was pending. Available information tends to
show that he has completed all probation requirements, and it is likely that his probation
ended on time. I resolve SOR ¶ 1.b for the Applicant.
In response, Applicant argued that his conduct was isolated and is now more
than four years removed. He also points to the successful completion of his probation
and counseling requirements, and to the excellent reputation he enjoys at work despite
apparent knowledge by his colleagues of his past adverse conduct. Such information
requires consideration of whether to apply the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 32(a) (so
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;) and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement). 
I conclude that Applicant does not benefit from these adjudicative factors.
Between August 2005 and August 2009, Applicant’s conduct was regulated, first by his
pending criminal prosecution, then by his probationary status, 21 months of court-
ordered counseling, and by his 90-day jail sentence, which could have been reinstated if
he broke the law before his probation ended. He has not established a sufficient record
6
of acceptable conduct purely of his own volition that would support a finding that he will
not repeat his criminal conduct in the future. On this score, I have also considered the
statement by Applicant’s counselor that he is “a low level risk for recidivism.” (Ax. C)
Aside from the fact that Applicant went through 21 months of counseling and the
counselor’s conclusion itself, there is insufficient information about the probability for
recidivism. This statement, taken in context of the record as a whole, is not persuasive.
More important, however, is Applicant’s continued minimization of his conduct
through his statements to a government investigator and to the witnesses who testified
for him at the hearing. Questions persist about his rehabilitation and, going forward, his
judgment and candor. The information contained in Gx. 3 is directly at odds with
Applicant’s statements and his testimony about his intent to have unlawful sexual
contact with a minor. In light of all of the information bearing on whether Applicant’s past
criminal conduct does not cast doubt on his “reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgement,” I do not conclude that either AG ¶ 32(a) or AG ¶ 32(d) apply. On balance, I
conclude Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion and has failed to mitigate the
facts established by the government’s information.
Sexual Behavior
Another security concern raised by Applicant’s arrest and conviction for a 2005
sexual offense is, as stated in AG ¶ 12, that:
[s]exual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality
or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference
concerning the standards in the Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
Over a three-month period in 2005, Applicant knowingly and repeatedly tried,
through internet instant messaging, to engage an 11-year-old girl in inappropriate
sexual conversation, telling her he wanted to have oral sex with her and suggesting she
could do the same for him. He tried several times to arrange a meeting with her to
actually engage in those sex acts. He was arrested and charged with a felony sexual
criminal offense, and later pleaded guilty to a lesser included misdemeanor charge. Part
of his sentence required him to participate in extensive counseling for sex offenders.
The foregoing requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 13(a) (sexual
behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been prosecuted) and
AG ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that which reflects lack of
discretion or judgment). As to AG ¶ 13(d), Applicant was over 30 years old and a long-
serving member of the Army. He, too, is a parent with a young child. His conduct in this
regard reflected  significant flaws in his discretion and judgment. Those flaws have been
preserved by his current attempts to minimize the true scope of his conduct.
Based on the same information Applicant presented to mitigate the criminal
conduct concerns discussed above, I have weighed the applicability of the mitigating
 See footnote 7 supra. 8
7
conditions listed at AG ¶ 14(b) (the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so
infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment),
and AG ¶ 14(c) (the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or
duress). For the same reasons AG ¶ 32(a) and AG ¶ 32(d) do not apply, AG ¶ 14(b)
does not apply. Applicant has attempted to minimize his conduct and he has not
established that he will continue to eschew such behavior in the future without fear of
the potential consequences of probation and a suspended jail sentence. I also decline
to apply AG ¶ 14(c). While it may be that his arrest was the subject of a local news
article, it also appears he knowingly misled three of his witnesses, in part, to help his
response to the government’s case, and, in part, because he did not want the true
scope and nature of his conduct to be known at work. All of the information bearing on
this issue of whether to apply any of the Guideline D mitigating conditions shows that
the Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion in response to the government’s
case.  
Whole Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and applied the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guidelines D and J. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 36 years old and
served his country for 14 years in the most honorable and arduous way. Aside from the
adverse information alleged in the SOR, he appears to have conducted himself
professionally and responsibly in both his military and his civilian capacities. His
colleagues and his supervisors at work and from his Army career regard Applicant as an
excellent, courageous soldier, and as a reliable, trustworthy, and valuable employee.
However, none of the positive recommendations presented herein appears to have
been fully informed about his conduct. It may be that even with full disclosure of his
conduct, those same witnesses and references would not change anything they have
said about Applicant. But because he has not been forthcoming about his conduct,
reasonable doubts remain about whether his past adverse conduct and poor judgment
will recur. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.  8
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance
is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
