 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-12166 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant signed his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF-86) on September 
10, 2008. On May 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On June 17, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. He elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 3, 
 
2 
 
 
2009. A Notice of Hearing, setting Applicant’s hearing for August 26, 2009, was issued 
August 6, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 5 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and called no witnesses. He introduced three exhibits, which were 
identified and marked as Ex. A through Ex. C and admitted to the record without 
objection.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
September 2, 2009, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional information 
for the record. Applicant timely filed six additional exhibits. Department Counsel did not 
object to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. I marked the post-hearing submissions 
as his Ex. D through Ex. I, and they were admitted to the record. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on September 2, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains nine allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant admitted all nine allegations and offered additional 
information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to 
SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 28 years old, an information technology (IT) specialist, and employed 
as a Blackberry administrator by a government contractor. He is single and has 
completed three years of college. He needs 20 additional college credits in order to 
obtain a bachelor’s degree. He seeks a security clearance. (Ex. 1; Tr. 16, 31, 64-65.)  
 
 Applicant owes approximately $34,000 in education loans. He owes the federal 
direct student loan program approximately $27,034, including interest, fees, and costs. 
These debts are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.g. Additionally, Applicant owes his 
state student loan program approximately $6,425. His state student loan debts are 
alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.h., and 1.i. The SOR alleges no other outstanding delinquent 
debts. (SOR; Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. D; Tr. 41, 57.) 
 
 Applicant began his college education in 1999. For his first two years of study, 
his parents paid his student loans. Then, as his younger sisters began to attend college, 
his parents found it necessary to assist them. Beginning in 2001, Applicant took on 
responsibility for paying his education loans.  (Tr. 27-28, 35-36.) 
 
 From May 2000 until October 2006, while he was enrolled in his university 
studies, Applicant participated in a federal Stay in School Program. He understood that 
the federal agency that employed him would pay his student loans if he maintained a 
“C” average. In 2006, the agency notified the Stay in School Program students that it 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
would undergo downsizing. Applicant and other students in the program were 
counseled and advised that they would be laid off. Applicant decided he would not wait 
to be laid off.   (Ex. 1; Tr. 34-35, 41.) 
 
 In November 2006, he took a job with a communications company as a customer 
account executive. His annual salary was $28,000.  He was having difficulty paying his 
education debts. His parents helped him by paying $2,000 on his state student loans. 
(Tr. 28.) 
 
  In February 2007, he took a job with another communications company. He was 
no longer in school, and his federal student loans were in default. He could not afford to 
repay the federal student loans. His salary was $34,000 a year, and in April 2008, he 
received a raise to $38,000 a year. He began to work for his present employer in 
September 2008, at an annual salary of $50,000. (Tr. 38, 41-42.) 
 
 Soon after beginning his present job, Applicant felt he was financially able to 
begin paying his student loan debts. He contacted the federal student loan program to 
arrange payment of his federal student loans. Because his loans were in default, he 
entered a program to rehabilitate them. Beginning in November 2008, he paid $299 a 
month to rehabilitate his loans and remove them from default status. In July 2009, the 
federal direct student loan program informed him that his regular payments had 
rehabilitated his delinquent loans. He continues to make monthly payments to repay his 
federal direct student loans. In August 2009, the federal direct student loan program 
notified him that it had requested that the national credit bureaus remove negative credit 
information about the loans from his credit reports. (Ex. C; Ex. E; Tr. 36-42, 49.) 
 
 In June 2009, Applicant entered into a payment plan with his state student loan 
program to repay his delinquent state student loans. He agreed to pay the state agency 
$270 a month until he was able to pay more. (Ex.B; Tr. 46-51.) 
 
 After his hearing, Applicant consulted with the state student loan agency and with 
a credit counseling firm about his state student loan delinquencies. The state student 
loan agency agreed to cancel the payment plan he had agreed to so that he could work 
with the credit counseling firm to consolidate his state student loan debt with his credit 
card debt of approximately $700 and pay both off at the same time.1 He did this 
because he thought it would have a beneficial effect on his credit rating. (Ex. D; Ex. G; 
Ex. H.) 
 
    Applicant’s net take home pay each month is $3,200. In order to save money and 
pay his debts, he lives at home in his parents’ basement, and he pays them $400 a 
month in rent. His food expenses are $250. He pays his family’s cable bill of $100 every 
month. He has a monthly car payment of $469. He spends $108 each month on car 
insurance and approximately $150 on gasoline. His monthly cell phone bill is $84. 
Additionally, he pays $299 to the federal direct student loan program, and he will pay 
 
1 Applicant testified that he was not in arrears on his credit card debt. (Ex. D; Tr. 58, 79.) 
 
4 
 
 
$270 or an equivalent amount to satisfy his delinquent state student loans. Periodically, 
he is repaying the $2,000 loan his parents made on his behalf when they paid his state 
student loan delinquency in 2006. To date, he has repaid $700 of the $2,000 to his 
parents. (Tr. 40-45. 53-55, 63-64.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a performance assessment from the company that employed 
him in 2007. The employer rated Applicant as a “High Contributor” and praised 
Applicant’s strong work ethic, his leadership, and his interpersonal skills. His current 
employer praised his “exceptional customer service experience,” his ability to work 
productively off-site without supervision, and his strong interpersonal skills. (Ex. F; Ex. 
I.)     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent student loan debt and 
was unable or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
 
6 
 
 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties related to his education loans, 
which are substantial. From 2000 to 2006, Applicant was enrolled in the federal Stay in 
School Program, and he expected the program to assist him with the payment of his 
student loans. In 2006, the federal agency where he worked cut back on funding for the 
Stay in School Program. Applicant left the agency and sought private sector 
employment. Between 2006 and the end of 2008, his low income prevented him from 
paying his delinquent federal and state student loans. When he obtained a job which 
paid him a better wage, he set out to satisfy his student loan delinquencies. Beginning 
in October 2008, he rehabilitated his federal direct student loans, and he has entered a 
payment plan to satisfy this debt of approximately $27,000. Additionally, he has sought 
credit counseling and is working with a credit management firm to consolidate payment 
of his state student loan delinquencies and his credit card debt. His current annual 
income is sufficient for him to make these payments, so long as he continues to live 
frugally. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old, and he has learned, through experience, some hard 
financial lessons. He has acknowledged his financial responsibilities and has made 
good-faith efforts to satisfy his creditors. He sought financial counseling, and it is clear 
that he is learning to resolve his current financial problems and to avoid repeating the 
same mistakes in the future. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply 
in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young person of 28 
years. His supervisors and co-workers respect him and rely upon his expertise and 
technical knowledge. His financial problems began when he accumulated student loan 
delinquencies and lacked sufficient resources to repay the loans. When he acquired a 
job that paid him enough income to meet his financial obligations, he set up plans to pay 
his student loan debts. At the present time, there appear to be no impediments to 
prevent him from timely repaying his student loans and meeting his other financial 
obligations. 
 
Applicant has shown good faith in contacting his creditors and arranging payment 
plans to satisfy his student loan creditors. He is currently living within his means and 
paying attention to his financial obligations. 
 
I observed Applicant carefully at his security clearance hearing.  I found him to be 
a serious and responsible person. I believe it is highly unlikely that in the future he will 
fail to carry out any of the responsibilities of a person entrusted with a security 
clearance and the protection of classified information. I conclude that he is not a 
security risk at this time. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                      FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.i.:          For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it  is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
