 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
         
   
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
  ) 
            )   ISCR Case No. 08-10079 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 17, 2007. On May 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 9, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 3, 
 
2 
 
 
2009. I convened a hearing on September 2, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 5 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called two witnesses. He introduced nine exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through I. All of Applicant’s exhibits 
were admitted without objection, with the exception of Ex. D. Department Counsel 
objected to the admission of Ex. D because it was an incomplete document. I noted 
Department Counsel’s objection, and I also left the record open for one calendar week, 
until September 9, 2009, so that Applicant could provide a copy of the complete 
document for the record.   
 
On September 9, 2009, Applicant timely filed five additional documents, including 
a complete copy of the document that had been identified at the hearing as Ex. D and 
admitted on the condition that he provide a complete copy of the document for the 
record. Without objection, Applicant’s Ex. D was admitted to the record. Additionally, 
Applicant filed a request for the record to remain open to receive additional information 
from him and three additional documents, which I identified and marked as Ex. J, Ex. K. 
and Ex. L. Applicant’s request that the record remain open was marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 1 and retained in the record.  Ex. J, Ex. K, and Ex. L were admitted to the 
record without objection. 
 
I granted Applicant’s request, and the record was left open for an additional 
calendar week, until close of business September 16, 2009. Applicant timely filed two 
additional exhibits, which I identified and marked as Ex. M and Ex. N and admitted to 
the record without objection.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on 
September 9, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the three allegations but denied that they constituted disqualifying 
conditions under AG F. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Answer 
to SOR; Tr. 66-67, 79-80.)  
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, married, and the father of four young children. From 
1995 to 2002, he served on active duty in the military. Since 2002, he has been 
employed as a security officer by a government contractor. He seeks a security 
clearance.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 63-64.)  
 
 Applicant’s monthly take-home pay is approximately $4,500. He also has a part-
time job as a church organist, from which he earns about $200 a month. His monthly 
fixed expenses are as follows: rent, $1,200; groceries, $400; clothing, $150; utilities, 
$200; automobile insurance and maintenance, $470; car payment, $650; 
miscellaneous, $100. His monthly net remainder is approximately $1,530. Applicant is 
 
3 
 
 
the sole support of his family. Since 2003, his wife has not been employed outside of 
the home. (Ex. 3 at 5; Ex. I; Tr. 86-89, 91-92.) 
 
 In January 2003, Applicant purchased a home for $120,000.  Applicant and his 
family lived in the home until about May 2005, when he purchased a second home for 
$281,000 and moved his family into the second home. In June 2005, he rented his first 
home to a tenant. (Tr. 67-70.)  
 
 In January 2006, Applicant refinanced the mortgage on the second home. The 
refinance paid off the original mortgage on the home and resulted in a new first 
mortgage with the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.b. and a second mortgage with the 
creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.a. After the refinance, Applicant’s monthly payments were 
$1,700 on the first mortgage and $650 on the second mortgage. (Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 67.) 
 
 Applicant was also responsible for paying the mortgage on his first home. He 
intended to use the rent he acquired from his tenant to pay the mortgage on the first 
house. Applicant’s tenant, however, was, at times, late in paying her rent. She also 
failed on other occasions to pay her rent to Applicant. Applicant tried to cover the 
mortgages on both homes, but was unable to do so. He fell about six months behind in 
his mortgage payments on both homes. (Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 69-71.) 
 
 Applicant took action to have the tenant evicted, and, in January 2007, she was 
evicted. Between January and April 2007, the property was vacant. In April 2007, 
Applicant sold the first home to an investor, who purchased the property for $232,000. 
The investor paid the back rent that had been owed by the tenant and brought Applicant 
current on the mortgage. The investor now pays the mortgage on the property, which 
remains in Applicant’s name until the property is sold. Applicant and the investor have 
an agreement that when the property is sold, Applicant will receive approximately 
$57,000 of the sale proceeds. To date, the investor has been unable to sell the 
property, and he currently rents it to tenants. (Ex. 3 at 7-8; Ex. D; Ex. F; Tr. 73-77.) 
 
 Applicant continued to fall behind in his mortgage payments for his second home. 
In February 2008, he and his family moved out of the home. He tried to sell the home, 
but he was unable to do so. The property went into foreclosure and was sold at auction. 
After the foreclosure, Applicant owed $59,708 to the holder of the second mortgage.  
This debt has not been satisfied and is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. After the foreclosure, 
Applicant also owed $31,220 to the holder of the first mortgage. This debt has not been 
satisfied and is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Ex. H; Tr. 68, 79.) 
 
 In December 2008, the holder of the first mortgage contacted Applicant and 
offered to settle the $31,220 debt for $9,381. In order to qualify for the settlement, 
Applicant was required to pay the creditor $50 a month from December 2008 through 
March of 2009. Applicant made one or two payments under the agreement but then 
failed to make the other required payments. He stated that he didn’t get around to 
making the payments, but he stated that it was his intention to make such payments in 
the future. He provided documentation to show that he made one $100 payment to the 
 
4 
 
 
creditor in August 2009. At his hearing, he stated that the creditor had agreed to accept 
payments on the debt of $100 a month, and he stated he would provide a copy of that 
agreement as a post-hearing submission. Applicant failed to submit the documentation 
corroborating his agreement with the creditor to accept monthly payments of $100 on 
the debt. Instead, he provided a settlement offer from the creditor, dated September 4, 
2009, offering to settle the $30,972 debt for approximately half of the balance, or 
$15,486. (Ex. 2 at 2; Ex. A; Ex. L; Ex. N; Tr. 79-84.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that the $59,708 debt to the holder of the second 
mortgage had not been satisfied. He acknowledged that, in January 2009, the creditor 
had offered him a loan modification agreement whereby he would make an initial 
payment of $605 to the creditor and then would make $310 monthly payments, 
beginning March 1, 2009. Applicant stated that he had not agreed to the loan 
modification offer but had, instead, made one payment of $100 to the creditor in August 
2009. He provided documentation to corroborate the $100 payment. He stated that he 
intended to make payments of $100 each month to the creditors identified at SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.b. until he satisfied both debts. (Ex. 3 at  11; Ex. L; Tr. 84-86, 90-91.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant owed a delinquent debt of $168 to a creditor 
on a cable bill. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) Applicant paid the creditor $163 on the debt, and he 
provided documentation establishing that $163 had been paid from his checking 
account to the creditor. He did not provide documentation to establish that the creditor 
considered the $163 as payment in full on the debt. (Ex. L; Tr. 93-94.)  
 
 At his hearing, Applicant reported that he was not current on his cable bill and he 
was one month late in paying his car note. He has not had credit counseling.  He has 
considered filing for bankruptcy. (Ex. J; Ex. K; Tr. 84-86, 94-95.) 
 
 Applicant’s father and a family friend appeared as witnesses on his behalf. His 
father praised Applicant as a very good son and a man of character, integrity, and faith. 
The family friend described the financial hardships that Applicant experienced with the 
downturn of the housing market. She stated that he had discussed filing for bankruptcy. 
(Tr. 40-43, 58-61.) 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
5 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
   
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties began in 2005 and 2006 when he was unable to 
sustain the financial responsibilities of owning two homes. He could not meet his 
mortgage payments on the two properties, and he was unable to sell them because of 
the downturn in the housing market. While Applicant was directly affected by the 
downturn in the real estate market and was subject to events beyond his control, he 
 
7 
 
 
also elected to purchase and pay for two properties on a single income. Some of his 
creditors sought to offer him settlements. However, Applicant failed to work with his 
creditors. He did not follow through on payment arrangements with his creditors, 
thereby demonstrating a failure to act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant’s inability to pay his mortgages caused him to become financially 
overextended. While he has a modest monthly remainder, his delinquent debts total 
almost $91,000, and he has few resources available to pay them at this time. He hopes 
to pay his creditors in the future, but he has difficulty meeting his basic expenses each 
month and has fallen behind in paying his cable bill and his car note, a situation which 
casts doubt on his ability to plan realistically for the future. He provided documentation 
to corroborate that he had paid $163 on a delinquent cable bill, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. 
However, he failed to establish that he had acted responsibly in dealing with the 
financial delinquencies that grew out of his failure to pay his mortgages and resulted in 
the substantial debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.    
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. While he admitted his financial 
delinquencies, it was not clear that he understood his financial problems or how to 
resolve them. He has no plan in place to systematically resolve his substantial 
delinquent debt and prepare for future contingencies. I conclude that while AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies in part to Applicant’s case, none of the other Financial Considerations mitigating 
conditions applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 34 
 
8 
 
 
years. He is appreciated by his family, friends, and community. He has been steadily 
employed for seven years since leaving military service. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began almost five years ago. He has not pursued 
financial counseling. His lack of attention to his financial delinquencies continues to 
raise security concerns. Despite a steady income for several years, and a net remainder 
of approximately $1,500 a month, he failed to budget his income to satisfy his 
delinquent financial obligations, raising concerns about his judgment and potential 
financial vulnerability. 
 
However, Applicant’s financial situation arises from unusual circumstances, and 
he may find it beneficial to seek professional financial counseling and legal advice about 
resolving his debts and acquiring financial stability in the near term. Applicant can 
reapply for a security clearance one year after the date that this decision becomes final.  
If he wishes, he can produce new evidence that addresses the Government’s current 
security concerns at that time.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:             For Applicant 
  
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
