                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11947 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On June 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 26, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 15, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 21, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on August 17, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through H, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on August 24, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c and 1.d. of the SOR. He 
denied the remaining allegations of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and began work with his current employer, a federal 
contractor, in June 2009. He retired from the Navy in August 2005, after 21 years of 
service, in the rank of E-7. He married in 1991 and separated from his wife in 1998. 
They divorced in 2003. They have two children, ages 16 and 14. Applicant remarried in 
July 2007 to a German national who resides in Germany. They do not currently live 
together, but visit each other several times a year.1  
 
 Applicant disputed with the credit bureau the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.s. All 
of these debts have subsequently been removed from his credit report. The debts were 
listed for a person with a different middle initial, different social security number, a 
spouse listed that was not Applicant’s, and an address in a different state. Applicant 
was on active duty, living in a different state, when many of these debts were incurred. I 
find these debts do not belong to Applicant.2  
 
 Applicant admits the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d are his debts. He explained 
that when he and his first wife separated and later divorced, he assumed all of the 
debts, totaling approximately $60,000. He stated she quit work a few months prior to 
their divorce, so the court would award her half of his income at the time. He slowly 
whittled away at paying off the debts. When he retired in 2005, he was out of work for 
approximately two to three months. He used his savings to support himself during this 
time. He had been earning approximately $60,000 in gross pay while in the Navy. His 
new job paid $39,000. His retirement income was $1,500 a month and $800 was used 
for child support. He got behind in his bills and used credit cards. He also found himself 
providing money to his mother. He later learned she was using the money to purchase 
unnecessary items. Upon learning this he ceased providing her money.3  
 
 In February 2007, Applicant sought assistance from a debt consolidator. He was 
advised that they could not help him and he should file for bankruptcy. He met with a 
lawyer and started the paperwork to file for bankruptcy. His lawyer told him to stop 
paying all of his delinquent bills. He followed her advice. In April 2007, Applicant 
1 Tr. 37-41. 
 
2 Tr. 24-37; AE B. 
 
3 Tr. 38, 47-53, 82. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
obtained a better paying job, now earning $55,000 annually. He withdrew his 
bankruptcy petition and started to pay some of his smaller delinquent debts. His annual 
pay increased incrementally to $68,000 in May 2009. In June 2009, he started a new 
job with an annual salary of $85,000.4  
 
 While still on active duty, Applicant took out a loan (1.c, $24,000) that had a 
smaller interest rate than his debts and paid some of the debts with this loan money. He 
thought he would be able to maintain the loan payments when he retired, but was 
unable to do so when he did not get a job right away. He set up a payment plan in April 
2008 to pay $150 a month through an automatic withdrawal from his account. By setting 
up the automatic payment, the creditor agreed to discontinue charging interest on the 
account. Applicant has been making consistent payments on this debt.5  
  
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card debt that carried over from Applicant’s 
divorce. He also used this credit card to take a cash advance to help his mother. He set 
up a payment plan in February 2009 to have $200 automatically withdrawn from his 
account each month. No interest is accruing on the debt based on his arrangement with 
the creditor.6  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is from a line of credit that Applicant obtained. He owes 
approximately $2,700 and set up a payment plan in June 2009 to have $100 withdrawn 
from his account each month. Applicant thought he previously set up an automatic 
withdrawal, but realized the creditor only withdrew the payment for one month. He 
intends to contact the creditor and correct the oversight. I find Applicant to be credible in 
that this was a mere oversight.7  
 
 Applicant contacted the creditor listed in the SOR ¶1.d. They had a payment 
agreement that he would make three monthly payments of $380 to resolve the debt. 
Applicant later learned from the creditor that the debt was sold to a collection company. 
When he spoke to the original creditor he was advised that the company was attempting 
to buy the debt back and resolve it directly with him, but it would take approximately 90 
days to complete. Applicant admitted he is somewhat confused about how to resolve 
the debt, not knowing if he should wait the 90 days and deal directly with the original 
creditor or attempt to resolve it with the collection company. He thought he had a 
payment plan, but it was with the original creditor, who no longer owns the debt. He 
intends to resolve the debt once it is sorted out which company he should deal with.8  
 
4 Tr. 42-45, 82, 85-86. 
 
5 Tr. 44-48, 68-71; AE C and D. 
 
6 Tr. 51-54, 64-66; AE E. 
 
7 Tr. 54-57, 66-68; AE F. 
 
8 Tr. 58-61, 71-72, 74. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant provided information that he has paid other delinquent debts that were 
not alleged. He also has a credit card that he uses for both business and personal use. 
He has a balance of approximately $4,700. He intends to start making larger payments 
towards this debt. He is current on the payments on this credit card.9 
 
 Applicant has had minimal financial counseling, which was limited to filing for 
bankruptcy. Applicant’s salary has increased since starting his new job. He intends to 
use the extra income to expedite paying his delinquent debts. His goal is to have all of 
his delinquent debts paid off by December 2010. He maintains a budget on a 
spreadsheet and records his income and expenses.10 
 
Applicant and his wife take driving trips, visiting different countries in Europe, 
when they visit each other. They alternate which one pays for the trip. Applicant shares 
a residence with another person and splits the rents.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
9 Tr. 72, 7-80; AE G. This information was not considered for disqualifying purposes, but is 
considered when evaluating Applicant’s complete financial situation and when analyzing the “whole 
person.” 
 
10 Tr. 97. 
 
11 Tr. 88-96. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has been unable or unwilling to pay his debts for a period of time. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant successfully disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.s with the 
credit bureaus because they did not belong to him. The debts were removed from his 
credit report. I find mitigating condition (e) applies to those debts. Applicant began 
having financial problems when he went through a divorce and was unemployed and 
underemployed for a period of time. These were conditions beyond his control. When 
he obtained a better paying job, he set up payment plans for his delinquent debts and 
has been making consistent payments. He started the paperwork to file for bankruptcy, 
but withdrew from it when his income increased and he was able to make payments on 
the debts. He has consistently paid his child support. Applicant now earns a good 
income and all but one delinquent debt is presently being paid through a payment plan. 
Applicant is ready to make payments to the appropriate entity once it is resolved 
between the original creditor and the collection company. Applicant’s debts are recent 
because he is still resolving them. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply because 
he is presently making payments on his delinquent debts and is still resolving one with 
the creditor. The causes of Appellant’s financial problems were his divorce and debts 
remaining from it, a period of unemployment, and a period of underemployment. He has 
been paying some of the smaller debts he owed, and once his income increased, he set 
up payment plans to resolve the larger delinquent debts. I find mitigating condition (b) 
applies because the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were beyond his 
control and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. I also find that he initiated a 
 
7 
 
 
good-faith effort to pay his overdue creditors and resolve his debts. He has payment 
plans to resolve his debts. He intends on expediting his payment schedule now that his 
salary has increased. He is ready to resolve the remaining delinquent debt once it is 
determined which entity he should pay. I find mitigating conditions (c) and (d) apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served his country in the 
Navy for 21 years. He went through a divorce that affected his finances negatively. 
When he was discharged from the Navy he was unemployed and underemployed for a 
period of time. Since his salary has increased, he has been consistently making 
payments on all of his delinquent debts except one. He will set up a payment plan on 
the remaining debt once it is determined who he should pay. I find Applicant is not a 
security risk. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from Financial 
Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:   For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
