1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 08-10976
SSN: ---------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for an industrial security clearance. The action
is based on Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties (delinquent debts).
The record contains insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security
concerns stemming from his history of financial problems, which are ongoing and
unresolved. Accordingly, as explained in more detail below, this case is decided against
Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 The government’s brief includes several attachments referred to as items. They are referred to as exhibits2
herein. 
 Exhibit 4. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on April 22, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the
factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F for
financial considerations. The SOR also recommended submitting the case to an
administrative judge for a determination to deny or revoke Applicant’s security
clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 1, 2009, and he did not request a hearing.
Accordingly, the case will be decided based on the written record in lieu of a hearing.
On June 29, 2009, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file
of relevant material (FORM)  was mailed to Applicant and received by him on July 16,2
2009. He did not respond within the allowed 30-day period. The case was assigned to
me on September 4, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged 13 delinquent debts ranging in amounts
from $162 to $7,492 for a total of about $20,000. Applicant’s answers to the SOR were
mixed and are set forth below. Based on the record as a whole, the following facts are
established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 31-year-old security officer. He has held this job since April 2008.
He married in 2004, and he and his wife are expecting their first child. His employment
history includes military service during 1996–2003, when he served on active duty with
the U.S. Coast Guard. 
Applicant is seeking to obtain an industrial security clearance for the first time. To
this end, he completed a security-clearance application in April 2008, and he reported
ten accounts in response to two questions about financial delinquencies.   In total, he3
reported about $10,000 in delinquent debts.
 Exhibits 6 and 7. 4
 Exhibit 7.5
 Exhibit 5. 6
 Exhibit 3. 7
 Exhibits 3 and 5.8
3
Credit reports from 2008 and 2009 establish (1) the debts alleged in the SOR,
and (2) that Applicant has a history of financial problems.  For example, the trade4
section of the 2008 credit report has 27 accounts of which 14 are described as
derogatory in some way (in collection, past due, etc.).  The individual debts, as alleged5
in the SOR, are addressed below.
Applicant denies an unpaid $296 charged-off account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He
contends the account was settled. In response to the Agency’s interrogatories,
Applicant presented (1) a settlement offer from a law firm for $445 payable by January
16, 2009, (2) the name of the law firm, and (3) a named point-of-contact with telephone
number as proof of payment.  Given these circumstances, coupled with the relatively6
low amount at issue, this debt is resolved.
Applicant admits an unpaid $1,422 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. In
response to the SOR, Applicant presented a settlement offer from a law firm, which
agreed to settle the account for $710 in three payments starting in June 2009.7
Applicant did not submit any other documentary proof for this debt. Given these
circumstances, this debt is unresolved.
Applicant denies an unpaid $7,492 account charged-off account alleged in SOR
¶ 1.c. He presented documentary proof that he settled this account for $6,000 in 2004.  8
Applicant admits an unpaid $285 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. This
debt is unresolved.
Applicant admits an unpaid $1,157 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. He
believes this is the same account as that alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l, which alleges the original
creditor for the amount of $1,156. This debt is unresolved, and it will not be discussed
separately as ¶ 1.l. 
Applicant admits a past-due account in the amount of $1,225 for an auto loan
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. In his Answer, Applicant indicated he would bring the loan current
by June 2009, but did not present any documentary proof of his actions. Given these
circumstances, this past-due account is unresolved.
Applicant admits an unpaid $762 charged-off account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. In
his Answer, Applicant stated he had received an offer to settle the account for $500, but
 Exhibit 5. 9
 Exhibit 5. 10
4
he has not presented any other evidence. Given these circumstances, this debt is
unresolved.
Applicant admits an unpaid $2,537 charged-off account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.
This debt is unresolved.
Applicant admits an unpaid $259 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. In his
Answer and in his response to the Agency’s interrogatories, Applicant explained that he
entered into a repayment plan or agreement with the collection agency in January 2009.
He made monthly payments and expected to make a final payment in June 2009. Given
these circumstances, coupled with the relatively low amount, this debt is resolved.
Applicant denies an unpaid $162 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. In
response to the Agency’s interrogatories, Applicant explained that he settled this debt in
2009 by making monthly payments in January, February, March, and April, but has not
received written confirmation.  Given these circumstances, coupled with the relatively9
low amount at issue, this debt is resolved.
Applicant admits an unpaid $797 collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. This
debt is unresolved.
 Applicant admits an unpaid $2,893 medical account that was placed for
collection. Applicant has attempted over the years to have this paid through his wife’s
health-insurance provider without success. He is now trying to settle the account with
the collection agency. This debt remains unresolved.
 In his January 2009 response to interrogatories, Applicant attributed his financial
difficulties to using credit cards due to a combination of factors: (1) a move to another
state in 2004, followed by his marriage, followed by a brief period of unemployment,
followed by a period of underemployment when he earned $7 per hour; (2) a new job as
a private investigator in 2005 when he had to pay for fuel expenses; (3) another job as a
private investigator in 2006 with better pay but the same fuel expenses; (4) his current
job beginning in 2008, which was a part-time position for the first three months, but has
been a full-time position since July 2008; and (5) the loss of a roommate/tenant, which
increased the monthly rental payment.  Applicant believes he and his wife are now in a10
better financial position, he knows he owes the money, and he wants to repay his debts.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to11
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 19
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).20
5
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As11
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,12
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An13
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  14
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting15
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An16
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate17
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme18
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.19
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.20
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.21
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating22
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 18.  23
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(a).  24
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(c). 25
6
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the21
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant22
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  23
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
To summarize, as set forth in the findings of fact, Applicant  resolved four debts
and eight debts are unresolved for a total of about $11,000. These facts and
circumstances raise concerns because it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of24 25
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 26
7
Guideline F. These facts and circumstances are more than sufficient to establish the
two disqualifying conditions noted above, and it suggests financial irresponsibility as
well.
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns as follows:  26
The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control;
The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none, either individually
or in combination, are sufficient to mitigate and overcome the security concerns.
Applicant’s financial problems are longstanding going back to about 2004–2005. They
are not minor, and they are ongoing and unresolved. He did not present evidence of a
realistic plan in place to address his remaining delinquent indebtedness and meet his
current financial obligations. The combination of factors Applicant points to as an
explanation for his financial problems are not so unusual or extraordinary to qualify as
circumstances largely beyond his control.  
He is entitled to some credit in mitigation, however, for his good-faith efforts in
resolving four debts. This is a good first step in the right direction. But more than half of
the indebtedness is unresolved, and it appears it will remain so for some time. Looking
forward, it is too soon to tell if Applicant will repay, settle, or otherwise resolve his
outstanding delinquent debts in a reasonable time and then continue to be a financially-
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).27
8
responsible person. These circumstances are plainly contrary to the clearly-consistent
standard I am required to apply. Accordingly, Guideline F is decided against Applicant.
In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the nine-factor whole-person
concept.27
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant did not meet his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided
against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d–1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.i–1.j:  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k, 1.l, 1.m: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.      
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
