 
1 
 
 
                                                
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11336 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. I also conclude that 
there is insufficient record evidence to conclude that Applicant is disqualified, pursuant 
to the Bond Amendment, from holding a security clearance. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on July 28, 2008. On April 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated May 12, 2009, Applicant requested a decision 
on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government did not request a hearing within 20 
days of receipt of Applicant’s Answer. (See Directive, Enclosure 3, Additional 
Procedural Guidance (E3.1.7)). The Government then compiled its File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on June 23, 2009. The FORM contained documents identified as 
Items 1 through 8. By letter dated June 24, 2009, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM 
to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections 
within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on June 29, 2009. His response 
was due on July 29, 2009. Applicant did not file additional information within the 
required time period. On September 3, 2009, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.), and ten allegations of financial 
delinquency under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.j.). In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the five Guideline H allegations. He admitted 
four of the Guideline F allegations of financial delinquency (SOR ¶¶ 2.b., 2.d., 2.f., 2.j.) 
He denied one Guideline F allegation (SOR ¶ 1.c.) as a duplicate of the allegation at 
SOR ¶ 1.d. There was insufficient evidence in the record to substantiate the allegation 
and to rebut his denial. Additionally, he denied the following five Guideline F allegations: 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a., 2.e., 2.g., 2.h., and 2.i. Applicant’s admissions are entered herein as 
findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.)  
 
 After a thorough review of the documentary record before me, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old, never married, and employed in information technology 
by a government contractor. From 2001 to 2008, he was self-employed in information 
technology. (Item 5.) 
 
 On September 17, 2008, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). On January 30, 2009, in 
response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a signed notarized statement that 
acknowledged and adopted the authorized investigator’s summary of his interview as 
accurate. He also affirmed his understanding that his responses to the interrogatories 
and the content of the investigator’s report might be used as evidence to determine his 
suitability for a security clearance. (Item 6 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant has used marijuana, with varying frequency, for approximately 27 
years, from 1981 to September 2008.1 He suffers from obsessive compulsive disorder, 
 
1 The investigator reported that Applicant had abstained from marijuana use between 1995 and 2003. 
However, in his responses to interrogatories, Applicant stated: “I do not have enough confidence in my 
memory to say, ‘He did not use marijuana from 1995 until 2003.” (Item 6 at 3, 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
depression, and anxiety. His problems with depression and anxiety began in 
adolescence. He has been under the care of a psychiatrist since 1995. Applicant 
described his medical treatment as follows: 
 
I’ve been prescribed at least 20 different medications with limited success 
and various side-effects. The only thing that I have found that can 
effectively stabilize my mood and reduce the anxiety is marijuana. When 
it’s out of my system, I’m less than useless. I become depressed, 
impatient, unmotivated, hopeless, and withdrawn. I have recently begun 
taking St. John’s Wort in addition to my prescribed medications in hopes 
that it will be something that can help me reduce (or perhaps eliminate) 
the marijuana. 
 
(Item 5 at 17.) 
 
 Beginning in 2003, Applicant used marijuana three times a day: in the morning, 
after work, and before going to bed at night in order to relax. He found that the 
marijuana had a calming effect on him. He used marijuana on the morning of the day he 
was interviewed by the authorized investigator from OPM. As of September 17, 2008, 
he purchased marijuana every two weeks. He spent about $240 a month on marijuana. 
(Item 6 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that he self-medicated with marijuana in order to 
be a productive person. He stated that he believed himself to be addicted to marijuana, 
and he believed he could not function without it. (Item 6 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant was never arrested for illegal drug use, and his illegal drug use was 
limited to marijuana. Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant received a 
diagnosis of drug abuse or drug dependence from a medical professional, nor does the 
record establish that he sought medical treatment specifically for his drug use. His 
family and coworkers did not know that he used marijuana. In a notarized statement, 
dated January 30, 2009, Applicant stated: “My point of contact (manager) is aware that I 
use marijuana.” His friends knew he used the drug, and he used marijuana with friends 
about twice a month. (Item 6 at 3, 6.)  
    
 Applicant reported a gross monthly income of $3,100. He was responsible for 
filing a Form 1099 to pay his income taxes at the end of the tax year. He identified the 
following monthly fixed living expenses: house payment, $489; car payment, $289; 
automobile insurance, $65; utilities, $120; association fees, $200; medications, $35; 
debt for advertising his former business, $320; and purchase of marijuana, $240. He 
stated that, in the past, he had paid the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $320 each 
month, but had not done so recently. His monthly disposable income did not include 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
setting money aside to pay his income taxes.2 Applicant acknowledged that he had not 
paid his federal income taxes for several years. He also acknowledged he had not paid 
his state income taxes since 2000. (Item 6 at 4, 7.) 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted four delinquent debts of 
approximately $31,219. Two of the debts were substantial: a $17,945 federal tax lien 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.) and a delinquent business debt of $12,018 (SOR ¶ 2.f.) Neither debt has 
been satisfied. Additionally, Applicant admitted that a notice of lien had been filed 
against him for $1,016 (SOR ¶ 2.d.), and the debt remained unsatisfied. While these 
delinquent debts remained unsatisfied, Applicant spent about $240 a month on 
marijuana (SOR ¶ 2.j.). (Answer to SOR; Item 6 at 3, 4, 7.) 
 
 In his September 17, 2008, interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant 
admitted a state tax lien of $2,328 to his state taxing authority and acknowledged that 
he had made no payments on the lien. In his response to the SOR, he denied the lien 
and stated that the lien had been satisfied. However, he failed to provide documentation 
to corroborate satisfaction of the lien. I find his denial is not credible in light of his other 
statements in the record. (SOR ¶ 2.a.; Answer to SOR; Item 6 at 7.) 
 
 In his September 17, 2008, interview with the OPM authorized investigator, 
Applicant admitted the $621 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 2.i., and he acknowledged that it 
was unpaid. He also admitted that the $537 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 2.g. and the $581 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h were his debts and remained unpaid. Applicant also told the 
investigator that he had paid the $974 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 2.e. However, he did not 
recall the amount of the debt or when it was paid. (Item 6 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that his financial problems arose when he had his 
own business and acquired a great number of debts he could not pay. He could not 
recall the specifics of any of the debts, but he stated he intended to contact his creditors 
and satisfy those debts that were in collection or charged-off status. (Item 6 at 4.) 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 2.e., 2.g., 
2.h., and 2.i., claiming that the debts were not his because they were in charged-off 
status. (Item 4 at 2, 3.) 
 
 Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant received consumer credit 
counseling. 
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
 
2 Later, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reported that his medication cost $758 per month. 
He also reported that he had failed to submit monthly payments of $320 on the business debt he owed, 
and the account was subsequently in collection status. (Item 6 at 7.) 
 
5 
 
 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
In SOR ¶ 1.e., the Government alleged that Applicant was disqualified under the 
provisions of 50 U.S.C. § 435c (the Bond Amendment) from holding a security 
clearance. By memorandum dated June 20, 2008 (hereafter cited as Memorandum), the 
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (HUMINT, Counterintelligence & Security) issued 
interim guidance for the implementation of the Bond Amendment. The interim guidance 
prohibited all Federal agencies from granting or renewing a security clearance to any 
person who is an unlawful user of a controlled substance or who is an addict. 
(Memorandum at 2.) 
 
The Memorandum defines “unlawful user of a controlled substance” as “a person 
who uses a controlled substance and has lost the power of self-control with reference to 
the use of the controlled substance” and “any person who is a current user of the 
controlled substance in a manner other than as prescribed by a licensed physician.” 
(Memorandum at 2.) 
 
The Memorandum further specifies that “such [current] use is not limited to the 
use of drugs on a particular day, or within a matter of days or weeks before, but rather 
that the unlawful use has occurred recently enough to indicate that the individual is 
actively engaged in such conduct.” Additionally, the Memorandum defines “addict” of a 
controlled substance as “any individual who habitually uses any narcotic drug so as to 
endanger the public morals, health, safety, or welfare; or [who] is so far addicted to the 
use of narcotic drugs as to have lost the power of self control with reference to his 
addiction.” (Memorandum at 2.)   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
The record shows that Applicant admitted the illegal use and possession of 
marijuana, with varying frequency, for approximately 27 years, from 1981 to at least 
September 17, 2008. He was using marijuana when he completed his e-QIP on July 28, 
2008, and he used marijuana on the morning of September 17, 2008, the same day he 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
was interviewed by an authorized OPM investigator. Applicant’s use of marijuana is an 
habitual, long-standing, lifestyle choice. 
 
When he completed his e-QIP, Applicant described marijuana as “the only thing 
that I have found that can effectively stabilize my mood and reduce [my] anxiety.” When 
he had no marijuana in his system, applicant felt “less than useless,  . . . depressed, 
impatient, unmotivated, hopeless, and withdrawn.” He told the authorized investigator 
that he believed himself to be addicted to marijuana. 
 
Applicant’s involvement with an illegal drug, marijuana, casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  It also raises security concerns about 
his ability or willingness to protect classified information and to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use raises security concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(h).3  
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  If Applicant’s drug use happened “so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt” on his 
“current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant “demonstrated [an] intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future” by “(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;” (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period; and (4) signing a “statement of intent with the automatic 
revocation” of his security clearance “for any violation,” then AG ¶ 26(b) might be 
applicable.  
 
The documentary record shows that Applicant’s drug use as of September 2008 
was on-going and frequent. As of January 30, 2009, the documentary record again 
reflects that he acknowledged marijuana use. He also maintained contacts with drug-
using associates, and he used drugs regularly with them. Nothing in the record 
suggests that he abstained from drugs for an appropriate period in order to demonstrate 
an intent not to abuse drugs in the future. Because he believed that only marijuana 
could reduce his frequent depression and anxiety, Applicant’s use of the illegal drug 
occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur. The record reflects a strong 
likelihood that he may not be able to abstain from drug use in the future. 
 
The Memorandum defines “current use” as unlawful use [that] has occurred 
recently enough to indicate that the individual is actively engaged in such conduct.” The 
record in this case is silent regarding the degree and frequency of Applicant’s use of 
marijuana since September 2008. Absent testimony from Applicant on the record about 
his current marijuana use and intent to use marijuana in the future, I conclude that there 
is insufficient evidence in the record to establish that Applicant is an addict who 
 
3 AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(c) reads: “illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.” AG ¶ 25(h) reads: “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly 
and convincingly commit to discontinuing drug use.” 
 
8 
 
 
“habitually uses any narcotic drug so as to endanger the public morals, health, safety or 
welfare.” Additionally, while Applicant’s  own statements establish that, as of September 
2008 and January 2009, he was “an unlawful user of a controlled substance,” there is 
insufficient evidence in this record to establish that he is a current user of marijuana and 
that he “has lost the power of self-control with reference to the use of the controlled 
substance.”  
 
I conclude that AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply in mitigation to the security 
concerns raised by the facts in Applicant’s case. I also conclude that there is insufficient 
record evidence to establish that the Bond Amendment applies to this Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(f), a disqualifying condition can arise when an 
individual’s “financial problems are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern.” Moreover, “failure to file annual [f]ederal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required . . .” can raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 19(g). 
 
Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and did not pay his creditors. 
Instead of paying his creditors, he devoted $240 a month to purchasing and using an 
illegal drug. He failed to file his state and federal taxes, which resulted in tax liens for 
which he failed to provide evidence of satisfaction. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. If the 
financially delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might 
apply.  If “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
 
9 
 
 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply. If “the 
individual initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply. Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. Moreover, the delinquencies 
remain unpaid and have occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur. He has 
not received financial counseling, and he had not made good faith efforts to pay or 
settle his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant reported that some of his delinquent debt resulted from business 
losses. However, he did not specify how the losses occurred and what he did to remedy 
or contain them. It is unclear that the business losses were beyond his control. 
Additionally, the record does not reflect that Applicant’s actions in the face of his 
financial difficulties were reasonable and responsible. In his interview with an authorized 
investigator, Applicant expressed his intent to satisfy and settle his delinquent debts in 
the future. However, in determining an individual's security worthiness, the Government 
cannot rely on an Applicant’s unsupported promise to resolve his outstanding debts at 
some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999).  I conclude that 
none of the guideline F mitigating conditions applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
10 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was candid in discussing 
his long use of marijuana and how, in September 2008, he used the drug in an attempt 
to alleviate his depression and anxiety. However, he failed to recognize how this 
conduct could compromise his ability to protect classified information. 
 
 Applicant has failed to satisfy his delinquent debts, and he fails to understand 
that he is responsible for debts that have been charged off and may no longer appear 
on his credit reports. He lacks a detailed, credible plan to resolve his current 
delinquencies and to avoid financial problems in the future. His reported use of his 
limited resources to purchase illegal drugs instead of paying his legitimate creditors 
raises concerns about his judgment and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d.: Against Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 2.c.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.d. through 2.j.: Against Applicant 
 
                             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
