 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-11150 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on July 31, 2008. On May 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 21, 2009. 
The case was assigned to me on July 24, 2009. On August 3, 2009, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 25, 2009. The case was heard on that 
date. The government offered six exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 – 6. Applicant testified and submitted no documents. The transcript was 
received on September 10, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.d, 
and 1.i. She admits the remaining SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old dispatcher for a Department of Defense contractor who 
seeks a security clearance. She has been employed in her current position since June 
2008. From 1989 to 1991, she served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps. 
She separated as an E-3 with an honorable discharge. She served in the United States 
Marine Corps Reserve from 1993 to 1997. She previously held a security clearance 
while in the Marine Corps and in previous employment with a defense contractor in 
1999. She is a high school graduate and has one year of college credit. She has been 
married twice. She is married and has four children, three sons, ages 16, 18, and 2, and 
a 13-year-old daughter. Her two older sons live with their father, her ex-husband. She 
lives with her husband, a 16-year-old step-daughter and her youngest son. Her 13-year-
old daughter lives with her grandparents during the school year. (Tr at 4-6, 22, 51; Gov 
1; Gov 2 at 12)  
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that she has the following 
delinquent accounts: a $156 medical account placed for collection in October 2005 
(SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 17; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 5); a $137 medical account placed for 
collection in August 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 17; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 5); a $539 
medical account placed for collection in October 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 17; Gov 5 
at 1; Gov 6 at 4); a $67 insufficient funds check written to a discount department store 
placed for collection in May 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 17; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 4); a 
$282 medical account placed for collection in June 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 17; Gov 
5 at 1; Gov 6 at 7); an $849 medical account placed for collection in July 2005 (SOR ¶ 
1.f: Gov 2 at 17; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 7); a $323 medical account placed for collection in 
August 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 2 at 17; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 7); a $54 debt owed to a 
grocery store for an insufficient funds check placed for collection in May 2003 (SOR ¶ 
1.h: Gov 2 at 18; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 6); and a $12,034 debt owed after a voluntary 
automobile repossession. (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 6 at 6).  
 
Applicant owes past-due child support for her two oldest sons. She did not make 
child support payments from 1999 – 2009. She claims she was unable to afford the 
child support payments in addition to supporting her immediate family. She testified that 
she knew her two sons were being well provided for by her ex-husband and his new 
wife. On June 23, 2008, she appeared at the courthouse in response to a contempt of 
court letter for unpaid child support. She was arrested and released several hours later 
after paying $1,000, which was applied towards her unpaid child support. Her paycheck 
is garnished $175.38 each pay period for child support. She is paid twice a month. The 
garnishment includes payments towards her past-due child support which totals 
$32,635.80. (Tr at 19-22, 40-43, 45; Gov 1, section 27; Gov 2 at 7-8, 14-16; Gov 4)   
 
Applicant has not made any payments towards the other alleged delinquent 
debts. The medical bills were the result of a medical treatment Applicant received in 
 
3 
 
 
2005 when she did not have medical insurance. She has not contacted any of the 
creditors who own the medical accounts. (Tr at 51) She contacted the creditors who 
own the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.h on several occasions. Neither creditor had 
information about a debt owed by her. (Tr at 33, 39) With regard to the $12,034 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, Applicant believes this is related to a vehicle she turned in for 
voluntary repossession in 1999. She has not been contacted by any agency pertaining 
to this debt. She has not attempted to contact the creditor who now owns the debt. (Tr 
at 33) In the past, Applicant had two periods of unemployment lasting approximately 
one – two months, when she was between jobs. From April 2006 to June 2008, she was 
unemployed after the birth of her son. (Tr at 19, 56-57)    
  
Applicant intends to resolve all of her delinquent accounts. She is unable to make 
any payments towards her delinquent accounts at this time.  Her net monthly income is 
approximately $929. Her husband is a musician. His net monthly income is between 
$300 and $400. He does not have a full-time job. They also receive $185 each month 
for food stamps. Their net monthly income is approximately $1,414. Applicant’s monthly 
expenses include: rent $880, groceries $200, utilities $36, and car expenses $80. The 
past-due child support is automatically deducted from her paycheck. Her total monthly 
expenses are $1,196. After expenses, she and her family have approximately $218 to 
$318 left over each month. (Tr at 43-44, 52; Gov 2 at 11) 
 
Applicant was arrested in January 2009 for grand theft auto, a felony. She  
testified that the automobile belonged to her best friend. Her best friend has mental 
health issues and has made several suicide attempts within the past year. In October 
2008, Applicant recommended that her friend go visit her sister who lives in another 
state in order to get away from her problems for awhile. Her friend had two cars. She 
drove one car to her sister’s house but one car remained in her driveway. Her friend left 
the car keys with a neighbor. During the last week in November, Applicant called her 
friend and asked her if she could use the car that was sitting in her friend’s driveway. 
She and her husband only had one car and were having difficulty accommodating each 
other’s work schedules. Applicant claims her friend told her that would be fine and to get 
the keys from the neighbor. Applicant got the keys from the neighbor and used the car 
for purposes of driving back and forth to work until January 15, 2009. Applicant claims 
she gave her friend $200 to cover the costs of additional insurance coverage. (Tr at 23-
25; Gov 2 at 4; Gov 3)  
 
On January 8, 2009, Applicant’s friend filed a criminal complaint against 
Applicant. She claimed when Applicant called to ask her if she could use her car, she 
told her “no.” She alleges Applicant obtained the car keys from her neighbor under false 
pretenses. On January 15, 2009, a sheriff’s deputy came to Applicant’s house. He 
asked for the keys to her friend’s car. Applicant gave him the keys but told him that she 
had permission to drive the car from the owner. Applicant was arrested and charged 
with grand theft auto. In April 2009, Applicant entered into a pretrial diversion program. 
Applicant did not want to plead guilty but did not want to put her friend through any 
added stress so she opted for the pretrial diversion program. When she discovered that 
the arrest may have an adverse effect on obtaining a security clearance, Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
voluntarily withdrew from the pretrial diversion program and requested a jury trial.  Jury 
selection was scheduled for August 31, 2009. She is adamant that she did not steal her 
friend’s car. When she got the keys from the neighbor, she told him that he could call 
her friend to confirm that she had permission.  She claims that as the main breadwinner 
for her family, she would not do anything to jeopardize her livelihood. (Tr at 26-31; Gov 
3) At the close of the record, Applicant had not gone to trial.  
 
Applicant’s manager testified on her behalf. She has worked for the company for 
the past 14 months. He works with her on a daily basis. He describes her performance 
as exceptional. He describes Applicant as reliable and dependable. Applicant’s 
manager serves as the alternate security officer for the company. Applicant contacted 
him the day after she was arrested on the grand theft auto charges. He is impressed 
with her honesty and the fact that she followed reporting procedures. Applicant is one of 
his top selections for potential promotion to supervisor. She does not need a security 
clearance in her current position but requires a security clearance for upward mobility. 
(Tr at 58-65)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are still required in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 30 of 
the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply. In June 2008, 
Applicant was arrested and charged with contempt of court for failure to pay child 
support. As a result of the arrest, Applicant’s wages were garnished to pay child 
support. In January 2009, Applicant was arrested for Grand Theft Auto, a third degree 
felony.   
   
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) are potentially 
relevant to Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and CC 
MC ¶ 32(c) (evidence that the person did not commit the offense) potentially apply. 
Applicant claims that her friend gave her permission to use her car. In order to prove her 
innocence, she withdrew from a pretrial diversion program and requested a trial. At the 
close of the record, the case had not gone to trial. It is premature to apply any of the 
above mitigating conditions with regards to the January 2009 arrest for grand theft auto. 
Contrary to Applicant’s assertions, her friend filed a theft report because she claimed 
 
6 
 
 
that she did not give Applicant permission to use the car. Her friend’s assertions in the 
criminal complaint conflict with Applicant’s story. Based on the facts in the record 
evidence, Applicant was arrested and the charges are still pending. For these reasons, 
concerns raised by Applicant’s arrest in January 2009 for grand theft auto (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
are not mitigated.  
 
The concerns raised by the contempt of court charges related to unpaid child 
support are mitigated. Applicant’s child support obligation is now deducted from her 
paycheck. I also considered the fact that it is unlikely that she was able to meet her child 
support obligations prior to being hired in her current job in June 2008. She was 
unemployed for two years prior to her current job. Her previous jobs did not pay well.  
Her failure to pay child support was because of an inability to pay as opposed to a willful 
refusal to make child support payments. SOR ¶ 1.b is found for Applicant.  
 
It is premature to conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised as a 
result of her arrest in January 2009 for Grand Theft Auto. Applicant has not met her 
burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under criminal conduct.  
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC & 19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant owes approximately $32,000 
in delinquent child support. She failed to pay child support over a ten-year period. She 
owes $12,034 as a result of voluntary automobile repossession. She has approximately 
$2,286 in delinquent medical bills and owes $121 for two insufficient funds checks. Her 
failure to pay her delinquent debts is the result of her inability to pay as opposed to a 
willful refusal to pay debts.   
 
The government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
 
7 
 
 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept, 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. While 
Applicant is now paying her monthly child support obligation by means of a 
garnishment, she has not taken steps to resolve her remaining delinquent accounts. 
She did not attempt to contact the creditor who holds the $12,034 debt related to the 
automobile repossession. She has not contacted any of the creditors who own the 
medical bills. She did attempt to contact the creditors of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
and 1.h but claims that neither company had records of an outstanding debt. Applicant’s 
financial issues remain unsettled. Her failure to take action towards the majority of her 
delinquent accounts continues to raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, 
and judgment. 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part. Applicant was unable to 
pay her child support obligations for a number of years because she did not have 
enough income. The medical expenses were incurred when Applicant had no medical 
insurance. Applicant did not work for two years after the birth of her youngest child, but 
the unemployment appears to have been voluntary. While certain factors beyond 
Applicant’s control contributed to her financial problems, I cannot say that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances because she failed to take action to resolve a 
majority of her delinquent accounts once she obtained full-time employment in June 
2008. Aside from the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.h, she made no attempt to 
contact her creditors to take action to resolve her accounts. She did not act responsibly 
under the circumstances.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. Aside from the 
child support obligation, all of her delinquent accounts remain unresolved. It is unlikely 
that her financial situation will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply with regard to most of the debts. 
However, credit is given for Applicant’s child support payments. She appeared to be 
sincere about making sure her financial obligations to her two older sons are eventually 
paid. She contacted the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.h, but neither creditor 
could locate her account. I find for Applicant with respect to these allegations because 
of her efforts to resolve these accounts. However, Applicant took no steps towards 
 
8 
 
 
resolving her remaining delinquent accounts. I cannot conclude that she made a good-
faith effort regarding those debts. 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Low wages, periods of voluntary 
unemployment, a spouse who does not work full-time, and a lack of health insurance 
contributed to her financial problems. I considered the favorable recommendation of her 
manager and his opinion of her outstanding duty performance. While Applicant is now 
paying child support, the majority of her delinquent accounts remain unresolved. 
Applicant needs more time to resolve her financial issues as well the unresolved issue 
pertaining to her January 2009 arrest for grand theft auto. While Applicant’s explanation 
of events leading to her arrest appears to be plausible, an issue remains because of her 
friend’s conflicting account that she did not give Applicant permission to use her car. At 
this time, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the Criminal 
Conduct and Financial Considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.j:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
