                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-12140
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On April 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 7, 2009, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on June 17, 2009, and was scheduled for hearing on June 30,
2009.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of considering whether
it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of two
exhibits (ex.); Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit.  The transcript
2
(Tr.) was received on July 9, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access classified information is granted.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, the SOR alleges that Applicant: (a) has a spouse and
daughter who are dual citizens of the U.S. and Brazil and reside in Brazil, (b) has a
mother-in-law who is a dual citizen of Brazil and Portugal and resides in Brazil, (c) has a
father-in-law who is a dual citizen of Brazil and Portugal and resides in Brazil, and (d)
has a father-in-law who is a high-ranking officer in the Brazilian Army.
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations.  He denied
that his wife and daughter reside in Brazil.  
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old senior staff software engineer for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant married his wife in June 1997 (ex. 1).  His wife was born and raised in
Brazil to the parents of Brazilian parents.  She was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in
November 2006 (see ex. 1; Tr. 24, 44).  Applicant and his wife have two children: ages
five and two (see ex. 1).
Applicant graduated from a highly regarded American university in June 1994 with
a bachelor’s of science degree in electrical engineering (ex. 1).  Following his graduation,
he was employed by a large computer maker as a software engineer, specializing in
FAA-related issues (Tr. 22, 37).  Applicant’s firm was later absorbed by a major defense
firm (see ex. 1; Tr. 35).
Applicant met his wife in 1994 at a local U.S. community college where she was
attending college on her father’s diplomatic visa (Tr. 22).  Her father is a high-ranking
officer in the Brazilian Army.  He was in the U.S. at the time as a part of an educational
exchange program operated by DoD (Tr. 23-24).  Before accompanying her father to the
U.S. on his exchange program, she earned a  bachelor’s of science degree in nutrition in
Brazil. 
Following her father’s return to Brazil, Applicant’s then-girlfriend remained behind
in the U.S. to continue her schooling and relationship she had established with Applicant.
Eventually, she earned a another bachelor’s degree in nutrition from an American
university.
3
 After they were married, Applicant and his wife purchased a home in March 1998.
In December 1998, they traveled to Brazil to attend a family-arranged church wedding
(Tr. 24).
Neither Applicant nor his wife discuss their business with her father.  Her father, in
turn, has never discussed his military work with Applicant (Tr. 25).  Essentially, Applicant
and his wife’s father have a relationship that does not include any discussion of each
other’s work and business (Tr. 25-26).  For additional safety precautions, Applicant never
discusses his business with his wife.  He confines his  work-related conversations with
his wife to work and travel schedules (Tr. 83-85).
Since their marriage in 1997, Applicant has made several family-related trips to
Brazil.  On these trips, he has never engaged in any business-related conversations with
his father-in-law.  When Applicant travels to Brazil, his wife and two children accompany
him. 
Applicant’s naturalized father currently resides in the Netherlands.  He became a
U.S. citizen in 1971 (Tr. 32)., and pursued his post-graduate studies in the U.S. at a
prestigious foreign business school (Tr. 73).  After working on projects throughout the
world for many years, he settled in the U.S. in 1999 (Tr. 33).  More recently, he moved
back to the Netherlands.  Applicant’s step-mother is a U.S. citizen who was born in the
Philippines (Tr.34).  She became a naturalized U.S. citizen after marrying his father, and
currently resides in the U.S.  Applicant has no brothers or sisters (Tr. 35).
Between 1997 and 2006, Applicant was involved in a host of FAA-related projects
for his employer.  Most of these projects required a security clearance, which Applicant
obtained in 2008 (see ex. 1; Tr. 37).  Beginning in 2006, he transferred his engineering
skills to security-related projects with his same employer (Tr. 36-39).
Applicant and his wife moved to his current state of residence in September 2006
with their five-year old daughter.  His mother-in-law visited them from time-to-time to help
with their daughter (Tr. 28).  After their second child arrived (in July 1998), his wife
departed with the child for Brazil to reside with her parents for a short time (Tr. 28-29, 42-
43).  While living in Brazil, his wife applied for Brazilian citizenship on behalf of their
daughter (Tr. 44-45).  She did this to preserve their daughter’s opportunity to become a
Brazilian citizen at some future time, should she choose to do so  (Tr. 45-46).  She
received Brazilian citizenship for their daughter in 2008 (Tr. 28-29, 44). 
More recently, Applicant’s father-in-law became a naturalized citizen of Portugal.
His wife’s parents will likely retire to Portugal.  
Applicant currently has little communication with his father-in-law (Tr. 26-27).
Before he returned to Brazil in 1997, Applicant occasionally saw him on his visits to the
U.S. His father-in-law last visited his wife and their family in June 2008 (Tr. 49-50).
Applicant has also had several opportunities to see his mother-in-law on her infrequent
visits to the U.S.  (Tr.  49).  
4
Applicant estimates to have made approximately nine trips to Brazil between 2000
and 2006 to see his wife and her parents.  He made trips in 2000 (twice), 2002, 2005,
2006 (twice), and 2008 (three altogether) (Tr. 50-57).  His Brazilian visits were always for
the sole purpose of seeing his wife and her family (Tr. 56). Since 2008, he has made one
trip to Brazil to see his wife and daughter (in February 2009), and he vacationed in Brazil
with his wife and children in April 2009 (see ex. A; Tr. 57).  
Applicant’s contacts with his in-laws have been exclusively face-to-face (see ex.
2; Tr. 70-71).  His contacts have been limited to his family visits to Brazil and the few
occasions when his in-laws came to his home in the U.S., with the last visit in June 2008
(Tr. 70).  Applicant’s conversations with his father-in-law never include discussions of his
work (Tr. 26).  His father-in-law knows the name of his employer, but nothing about the
nature of his work (Tr. 61).
Applicant’s in-laws reside outside of the Brazilian capital city.  His father-in-law is
a high-ranking officer in the Brazilian Army (Tr. 58).  His father-in-law attended the top
military academy in Brazil for leadership training (Tr.58-59), and grew up in a relatively
privileged social setting.  His family once owned a factory. Eventually, they lost
everything (Tr. 59).  His  father-in-law resided in military housing for most of his early
military career.  In the 1990s, he and his wife’s mother bought a plot of land.  They built a
house on this land and moved into the new home in 2000 (Tr. 60-61). Applicant’s
mother-in-law is a retired school teacher.
Applicant assures that should his father-in-law ever inquire about his business, he
would follow his employer’s strict reporting guidelines (Tr. 66-67).  These guidelines
would require Applicant to report any inquiries from his father-in-law through his
employer’s established ethics chain of command, beginning with his facility security
officer (FSO) (Tr. 66-68).  
Applicant has already advised his FSO of his father-in-law’s status in the Brazilian
Army (Tr. 65-66).  Applicant is would report his father-in-law to his FSO were the father-
in-law ever to be pressed by his father-in-law for business-related information (Tr. 64-
65). He would report any Brazilian intelligence information passed on to him by his
father-in-law (Tr. 67-68).  
Applicant is semi-fluent in Portuguese and knows a little French and Spanish (Tr.
71).  While his work has been limited to projects requiring only a collateral security
clearance, he could conceivably work on projects in the future that require a higher level
of clearance (Tr. 85-86).  
Brazil’s country status
Brazil remains a non-hostile trading partner of the U.S. and is a country whose
democratic institutions are not incompatible with our own traditions and respect for
human rights and the rule of law. Brazil maintains strong bilateral trading and commercial
relations with the U.S. and is a charter member of the Organization of American States.
5
See Background Note: Brazil,  U.S. Department of State (2008).  Brazil is a country with
no known recent history of government-sponsored hostage taking or disposition for
exerting undue influence against family members to obtain either classified information,
or unclassified economic and proprietary data (id.) 
Policies
The revised AGs list guidelines to be considered by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines require the
administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating
Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be
granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the administrative judge to
assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant
Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ E.2(a) of the
revised AGs, which are intended to assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests,
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication
under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  (AG), ¶ 6.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an Applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends,
in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
6
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a
material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.
The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the Government
to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or abused
classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately
or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation
or mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that
all security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Applicant presents as a conscientious senior staff software engineer who
married a Brazilian citizen who became a naturalized U.S. citizen following her
marriage to Applicant in February 1997.  Applicant and his wife have two children, one
of whom became a naturalized dual citizen of Brazil. 
Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s father-in-law
who is a dual citizen of Brazil and Portugal and a high-ranking officer in the Brazilian
Army.  Department Counsel raises security concerns over risks that Applicant’s in-
laws (primarily his father-in-law) residing in Brazil might be subject to undue foreign
influence by Brazilian government and military authorities to access classified
information in Applicant’s possession or control. 
Because Applicant’s in-laws (particularly his father-in-law) reside in Brazil, they
present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition (DC) ¶
7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend,
or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion,” of the guidelines for foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of
these in-laws in Brazil pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks
of undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information
under Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Due to the infrequency of the contacts (all face-to-face) Applicant has
historically had with his in-laws, potential risks associated with his in-laws residing in
Brazil are tempered considerably. Moreover, none of Applicant’s in-laws have any
identified affiliations or contacts with Brazilian officers currently known to be
7
associated with intelligence or military organizations interested in collecting proprietary
or sensitive information in the U.S.
Further, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of Applicant’s
in-laws residing in Brazil have any known (a) political affiliations with Brazil’s
government, (b) history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or (c)
or major indications of any vulnerability to the same.  Applicant’s mother-in-law is a
retired school teacher with no apparent political interests in Brazil or the U.S.  While
his father-in-law is a high-ranking officer in the Brazilian Army, he has shown no
interest in Applicant’s  business and made no attempts to discuss his business and
military interests in Brazil or inquire of Applicant’s business.  Applicant has already
kept his FSO informed of his father-in-law’s military status, and pledges to report any
business-related inquiries of his father-in-law in the future in compliance with his
employer’s strict reporting guidelines. 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of
foreign countries in officer.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign
country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical
necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Brazil. 
Unlike the old AGs, the new ones explicitly take into account the country’s
demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging whether
the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened
security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime
involved do matter.  Brazil remains a friendly country of the U.S. with strong bilateral
trade and commercial relations, a good humans rights record, and historical respect
for the rule of law. 
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant's relatives in
Brazil, any potential heightened risk of a hostage situation or undue foreign influence
brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or economic or proprietary
data out of Applicant through his in-laws residing in Brazil is quite remote.  Applicant,
accordingly, may take partial advantage of one important mitigating condition: MC ¶
8(a), “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or
government and the interests of the U.S.” 
MC ¶ (8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” has application, too, to Applicant’s situation.
8
Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth who has demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and
professional commitments to the U.S. throughout his life.  His wife is a naturalized
U.S. citizen, and both of his children are U.S. citizens by birth.  And all of his financial
interests (home and retirement savings) are situated in the U.S.  Whatever potential
conflicts he may have through his in-laws (primarily his father-in-law) who reside in
Brazil are more than outweighed by Applicant’s demonstrated U.S. citizenship
responsibilities.
MC ¶ (8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons,
groups, or organization from a foreign country,” has some applicability as well to
Applicant’s situation.  He credibly assured that he advised his FSO of his father-in-
law’s military status and would report any further business-related contacts of her
father-in-law, should they occur.  Applicant has a considerable history of reliable and
trustworthy service to his defense contractor and the U.S. and merits acceptance of
his reporting commitments.
Whole person assessment also serves to minimize Applicant’s exposure to
conflict of interests with his Brazilian in-laws.  Not only is Applicant a U.S. citizen by
birth with demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to the U.S.,
but he has made every effort to keep his FSO informed of his father-in-law’s military
status in Brazil.  Any risks associated with Applicant’s in-laws are clearly manageable
ones.  In Applicant’s case, any likelihood of coercion, pressure, or influence being
brought to bear on any of his in-laws, spouse or children by Brazilian authorities is
minimal. 
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's in-laws
residing in Brazil are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about
Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his familial
relationships in Brazil. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a through 1.e of Guideline B.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2(a) of the revised AGs.
 F   o  rmal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following
separate formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1e:            For Applicant
9
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
