                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10200
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
September 22, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated January 24, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On April 9, 2009, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
(as amended), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January
2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 5, 2009, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge.  The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on July 21, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on July 22,
2009, scheduling the hearing for August 21, 2009.  The Government offered seven
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without
objection. Applicant offered twelve exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through
2
L, which were received without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The
record remained open until close of business on August 28, 2009, to allow the Applicant
the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted two Post-
Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B.  The
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on August 28, 2009.  Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on the Applicant’s Answer to the SOR,
his testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 31 years old and has completed about
two years of college.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Program Analyst
and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.  
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same,
the following findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the
SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he is financially overextended
and at risk to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The Applicant admits to each of the allegations set forth in the SOR, namely that
he was indebted in the amount of approximately $88,000.00 in delinquent debt, most of
which was an equity line of credit used to pay off his ex-wife.  Credit Reports of the
Applicant dated March 31, 2008; November 1, 2008; June 9, 2009; and August 16,
2009; collectively reflect each of the outstanding debts listed in the SOR.  (Government
Exhibits 4, 5 6 and 7).  The Applicant has been employed for a defense contractor since
October 2007.
The Applicant joined the United States Marine Corps in 1995, and spent nine
years and eleven months of successful service.  He was honorably discharged in 2005.
His military record includes three combat tours in Iraq, in 2003, 2004 and 2005, and
show that  he was a  highly decorated Marine with a stellar career.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
I).  
The Applicant explained that a series of unexpected circumstances caused or
contributed to his delinquent debt.  In 1998, he married another active duty Marine and
they had two children.  Things did not work out, they physically separated in 2004, and
were divorced in 2006.  Applicant assumed most of the debt incurred during the
marriage, and although he and his ex-wife have joint custody of their two children, the
children reside with the Applicant the majority of the time.  His ex-wife decided that she
3
no longer wanted responsibility for the children, and she pays no child support to the
Applicant.  Applicant was forced to leave the Marine Corps because he was left as a
single parent with the possibility that he would be deployed without anyone to take care
of his children.  Although it was a difficult decision, he left the military in 2005, to provide
a stable environment for his children.  The Applicant was able to find employment, but
he did not earn as much as he had previously in the military.  He then took a job in
residential real estate that was commission based, and he did not do well.  This caused
more financial difficulties and his bills became delinquent.             
The debts set forth in the SOR were incurred during the marriage, and as of
February 9, 2009, they remained owing.  The Applicant was indebted to a creditor in the
amount of $516.00.  The Applicant has paid off the debt and it is no longer reflected as
owing on his most recent credit report.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A and Government Exhibit
6).    
Applicant disputes the debt to a creditor in the amount of $2,729.00.  He
contends that the debt was never his debt.  When he learned of the debt in 2006, he
contacted the creditor and informed them that he never authorized the account, that it
was apparently a situation of stolen identity and a fraudulent credit card.  The creditor
acknowledged the fact and told the Applicant that it would be removed from his credit
report.  (Tr. pp. 35 - 36).  This was not done and the debt remains on the Applicant’s
credit report as owing.  
Applicant was indebted to a creditor in the amount of $261.00.  Applicant
contends that the debt has been paid, as the debt is no longer reflected on his credit
report as owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C and Government Exhibit 6).    
Applicant was indebted to a creditor in the amount of $3,632.00.  Since April
2009, the Applicant has been making monthly payments of $100.00 toward the debt to
get it resolved.  The creditor has agreed to this payment plan.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D).    
Applicant was indebted to a creditor in the amount of $6,342.00.  The Applicant
has been making monthly payments of $100.00 toward the debt to get it resolved.  He
currently owes approximately $5,842.00.  The creditor has agreed to this payment plan.
(Applicant’s Exhibit E).
     
Applicant was indebted in the amount of $78,108.00.  He explained that in 2005,
he obtained an equity line of credit on his home and gave most of the money to his ex-
wife as a divorce settlement.  Although he had tried to keep the house, his home was
foreclosed upon in April 2008, and the house was sold.  Applicant is making payments
of $100.00 monthly toward the debt to resolve it.  He currently owes $75,008.68.
(Applicant’s Exhibit F).       
Applicant has recently reduced his monthly expenses in order to use the
disposable money to pay off his delinquent debt.  He has moved close to his job, and is
4
able to save about $400.00 monthly in gas.  He plans to resolve his indebtedness as
soon as possible.  (Tr. p. 47).
Letters of recommendation from his Security Manager, other professional
colleagues and a Retired Marine Colonel, who have known the Applicant for many
years, indicate that the Applicant is a high performer who accomplishes all tasks to the
highest standards.  He is considered an honorable man, with a strong sense of integrity,
responsibility, ambition, trustworthiness and good judgment.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G and
Post-Hearing Exhibit B).
        
Among the Applicant’s military awards are the Good Conduct Medal a Certificate
of Achievement, and a Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit H).
Excerpts from the Applicant’s military records reflect that he was on the
Commanding General’s Honor Roll in 2001, completing the Sergeants Course class
with a final cumulative average of 96.94.  He was an excellent leader, high performer,
consistently recommended for promotion, and considered one of the finest and
exceptionally qualified Marines.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I).  
Applicant’s most recent performance appraisal reflects ratings of “consistently
above acceptable” and fully acceptable” in every category.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit A).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
5
19(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
20(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances:
20(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
6
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, a security clearance is entrusted to civilian workers who
must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore appropriately concerned when
available information indicates that an Applicant for such access may be involved in
instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence also shows that circumstances largely beyond the Applicant’s
control contributed to his financial indebtedness.  Applicant’s divorce mainly caused his
financial problems.  His ex-wife’s refusal to assist him with their children, his decision to
separate from the Marine Corps and take a lower paying job, and his assumption of the
debt incurred during the marriage, together caused serious financial difficulties.
Recently, he has addressed each of his creditors.  He has paid off several of the
creditors and set up payments plans with the others to resolve them as soon as
possible.  He must continue to demonstrate financial responsibility.  Under the
circumstances, the Applicant has done his best to be responsible and has made a good
7
faith effort to resolve his debts.  He realizes that he must continue to pay off his
delinquent debt, and live within his means in order to pay his bills on time.  In the event
that he has any future financial problems, his security clearance would immediately be
in jeopardy.  However, at the present time, considering all of the evidence, the Applicant
has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is
sufficient to overcome the Government's case.  
Under Guideline F, Disqualifying Conditions 19(a) inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts and, 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.  However,
Mitigating Conditions 20(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances, 20(c) the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control and, 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts also apply.
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, his
favourable character references and the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the
guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole person assessment of good judgement,
trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, or
other characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified
information.  
There is evidence of financial rehabilitation at this time.  The Applicant has
initiated a good faith effort to repay his overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts.
Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.     
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
8
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
