                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10936 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on March 31, 2008, as part of his employment with a defense contractor. On 
May 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations 
under Guideline F, and for personal conduct under Guideline E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on 
June 13, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response that was received 
by DOHA on June 29, 2009. The explanation he provided that accompanied his 
response was dated June 25, 2009. He admitted 24 and denied 5 allegations under 
Guideline F. He denied the security concern for financial considerations. He admitted 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
three and denied one of the four sub-allegations under Guideline E pertaining to his 
failure to list arrests on his security clearance application. He denied the allegations 
under Guideline E pertaining to not listing debts more that 180 days past due in the last 
seven years and currently more than 90 days past due. He denied the security concern 
for Guideline E. He provided an explanation for his financial issues and his personal 
conduct. He did not request a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel did request a hearing and was ready to proceed on July 10, 2009. The case 
was assigned to me on July 20, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 30, 
2009, for a hearing on August 20, 2009. Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing on 
August 8, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The government offered five 
exhibits, marked Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified on his behalf and offered nine exhibits, marked 
Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A - I which were received without objection. The record 
was left open for Applicant to submit additional documents.  Applicant timely submitted 
one document marked App. Ex. J. Department Counsel did not object to the admission 
of the document (Gov. Ex. 6, Memorandum, dated September 16, 2009). DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 25, 2009. Based on a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing on August 8, 2009. Applicant is 
entitled to 15 days notice of hearing (Directive E3.1.8). Applicant discussed with 
Department Counsel the hearing date of August 20, 2009, prior to the mailing of a 
Notice of Hearing. Accordingly, actual notice was given more than 15 days prior to the 
hearing. However, Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing only 12 days prior to the 
hearing. He waived the 15 days notice requirement (Tr. 6). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 38 years old and has been a security guard and emergency medical 
technician for a defense contractor for over two years. He also is a full-time college 
student and anticipates receiving his degree in two more semesters App. Ex. G, 
Transcript, dated August 18, 2009). He does not believe he ever requested or was 
granted a security clearance even though he worked construction at a military 
installation. He had periods of unemployment over the last ten years when he was a 
construction worker. The last time he remembers being unemployed was about seven 
years ago. (Tr. 21-24). Applicant is a certified Emergency Medical Technician (EMT), 
certified ambulance driver, and certified in basic life support programs (App. Ex. A, 
Certificate; App. Ex. B, Certificate, dated February 6, 2009; App. Ex. C, Certificate, 
dated February 24, 2009). He has been recognized by his company for outstanding 
service (App. Ex. D, Certificate, dated July 28, 2009). His present monthly net salary is 
 
3 
 
 
$3,840, with monthly expenses of approximately $2,100, leaving approximately $1,800 
in monthly discretionary funds (Tr. 32-33). 
 
Credit reports list the following financial issues for Appellant: medical debts in 
collection for $1,465 (SOR 1.a), $938 (SOR 1.b), $253 (SOR 1.c), $391 (SOR 1.d), 
$324 (SOR 1.e), $377 (SOR 1.f), $253 (SOR 1.g), $209 (SOR 1.h), $435 (SOR 1.i), 
$363 (SOR 1.j), $469 (SOR 1.k), $3,876 (SOR 1.l), $664 (SOR 1.m), $234 (SOR 1.n), 
$1,122 (SOR 1.o), $348 (SOR 1.t), $216 (216 (SOR 1.u), $68 (SOR 1.v), $454 (SOR 
1.w), $3,338 (SOR 1.x), $343 (SOR 1.y), $298 (SOR 1.z), $281 (SOR 1.aa), and 
$11,785 (SOR 1.bb); a credit card debt in collection for $771 (SOR 1.p); an account in 
collection with a jeweler for $3,728 (SOR 1.q); a telephone account in collection for 
$109 (SOR 1.r); an account in collection for $123 (SOR 1.s); and another telephone 
account in collection for $111 (SOR 1.cc; Gov. Ex. 3, Credit report, dated April 22, 
2008). He also has student loans of approximately $10,000 in deferment (Tr. 33). 
Applicant admitted the medical debts but denied the debts at SOR 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s. 
Most of these debts arose from 2006 to 2007 (Tr. 24-25). 
 
Applicant recently sold his house and made a profit of approximately $60,000.  
The majority of the proceeds from the house sale were deposited in Applicant's bank 
account on August 14, 2009 (App. Ex. H, Account Information, dated august 14, 2009 
(prior to the deposit), App, Ex. I, Account information, dated August 14, 2009 (after the 
deposit)). The account has a balance of over $60,000 (Tr. 33-34).  
 
Applicant believes most of the medical bills are from his visits to hospital 
emergency rooms for a bulging disc, and a cut on his hand from barbed wire. He also 
had a hospital stay for an appendix removal. Since he worked construction during most 
of this time, he did not have health insurance. He only recently obtained health 
insurance (Tr. 10-11, 25-26, 28-29).  
 
Applicant settled his debt with the collection agency for the jeweler for $2,343.35 
(App. Ex. E, Letter, dated June 29, 2009). This debt was paid in the settlement for the 
sale of his house (Tr. 26-27; App. Ex. F, Settlement document, dated July 16, 2009). 
 
Applicant denied the credit card debt at 1.p. The card was a membership credit 
card which was opened with a credit balance from him of $150. He used it only once 
and the company charged him membership fees. He denied owing the creditor the 
amount of the debt. SOR allegation 1.q was the jeweler debt that was settled and paid. 
Applicant believes he paid the creditor at SOR 1.r. He did not present any information to 
establish payment of the debt. He has no information on the debt at SOR 1.s, so he has 
not paid the debt (Tr. 30-31). 
 
Applicant also paid a debt not listed on the SOR. He paid a utility debt of $421.  
This was not his debt but one from his brother who used his name to obtain the service. 
Nonetheless, he paid the debt (Tr. 27-28; Gov. Ex. 4, Answer to Interrogatories, dated 
March 2, 2009, at 4). His student loans are in deferment since he is still in school (Tr. 
28-29). 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has not paid his other delinquent debts because he only had limited 
funds and not enough time to pursue past debts and creditors. He is working and 
attending school full-time. He also stated that he really did not have an excuse for not 
paying the other debts. Applicant has not yet taken any action on his debts because he 
has "had so much going on, between working and going to school full-time and moving 
and doing all this stuff. I just really don't have an excuse, I don't guess." (Tr. 25-26, 28-
29, 34-35). He stated he intends to employ a debt consolidation specialist to assist him 
in paying his debts and reestablishing his credit. After the hearing, Applicant employed 
an attorney who notes he is assisting Applicant in satisfying his debs and meeting his 
financial obligations (App. EX. J, Letter, dated September 4, 2009). 
 
Applicant did not list all offenses in response to question 23(d) on the e-QIP 
asking if he had ever been charged or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or 
drugs. Applicant listed a disorderly conduct offense in 1996. A Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) criminal justice report shows Applicant was charged with illegal 
possession of prohibited liquor on May 9, 1992, with public intoxication on March 1, 
1997, with possession of marijuana on July 17, 1998, and with public intoxication on 
September 21, 2004 (Gov. Ex. 2, Criminal Justice Information report, dated April 22, 
2008). Applicant also answered NO to question 28 concerning any delinquent debts in 
the last seven years more than 180 days past due, and any debts currently more than 
90 days past due. As noted above, he has delinquent debts since 2006.  
 
Applicant testified that in completing his security clearance application, human 
resource personnel for his employer had him provide them a written answer to the 
questions, and they entered his answers on the computer driven document. He knew he 
had delinquent debts for medical expenses but did not know the number or the amounts 
of the debts. He had received inquires about his medical debts but not recently. He is 
"not real sure" why he did not provide any information concerning his delinquent debts. 
In response to the question concerning being arrested or charged with an offense 
involving alcohol or drugs, he stated he read the question and does not understand why 
he did not answer it correctly. He stated that he now remembers the offense. He further 
stated "But I don't know if I was in a rush or - -I didn't intentionally mean to lie. I mean it 
makes me sound really bad. But I just - - the only defense I have is that I forgot" (Tr. 35-
41). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
 
6 
 
 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debts as listed on credit reports and admitted by 
Applicant are a security concern raising Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC 
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).   
 
 I considered the Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) raised 
by Applicant's testimony. FC MC AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was 
so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), 
and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) do not apply. Applicant incurred delinquent 
medical debt when he did not have health insurance and had to visit emergency rooms 
for treatment and was hospitalized. He has not inquired about or paid any of the debt.  
He has other debts that he has not paid. The debts are numerous and still current. 
Applicant presented no circumstance beyond his control that caused him to incur debt 
or prevented him from paying the debts. He has not paid the debts even though he has 
the resources to pay them. He has not established that he acted responsibly towards 
his financial obligations. 
 
 FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant presented documentation to establish he consulted 
an attorney after the hearing to assist him in satisfying his debts and meeting his 
financial obligations. However, he has not presented any information to show he 
developed a plan or made any attempts to pay his financial obligations. There is no 
clear indication, therefore, that the financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) "the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts". For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
Good-faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. Most of the debts arose in the 2006 and 2007 time 
frame. Applicant presented no information to show he is paying his delinquent debts. He 
may in the past have resolved two debts, but he has numerous debts for which he 
admits he has not contacted the creditors or made any attempt to pay. He has not 
established a meaningful, reasonable, honest, or prudent plan to pay his debts. He has 
the resources to pay his debts, but presented no plan to do so. Applicant did not present 
sufficient information to establish a good-faith effort to pay creditors or resolve debts. 
 
7 
 
 
His finances are not under control and he has not acted responsibly. Accordingly, he did 
not mitigate security concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. 
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government. Applicant’s incomplete answers on his 
security clearance application concerning charges or arrests relating to alcohol or drugs, 
and debts past due more than 180 days or 90 days, raise a security concern under 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) "the deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct investigations, to 
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness." 
 
 The government produced substantial evidence to establish the disqualifying 
condition in AG ¶ 16(a). The burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the concerns raised under personal conduct (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15). An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government (See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)).   
 
 While there is a security concern for an omission, concealment, or falsification of 
a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the government when 
applying for a security clearance, every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement 
is not a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is 
done knowingly and willfully. Applicant denied intentionally providing false or misleading 
information, but he could not explain why he did not provide accurate information in 
response to the questions. The questions to which Applicant provided false information 
are straightforward and uncomplicated. Applicant is within two semesters of graduating 
from college so he should be able to understand the intent of the questions. Applicant's 
testimony on this issue is basically that he did not know why he did not provide accurate 
information.  He knew that he had delinquent debts, and he knew he had committed 
criminal acts that related to alcohol and drug use. He admitted to most of the allegations 
when they were included in the SOR. Applicant was either very careless or deliberately 
provided false information in completing the e-QIP. Since Applicant could not provide 
any reason for his failure to provide accurate information, I conclude he has failed to 
 
8 
 
 
mitigate the security concern for personal conduct. The government established that 
Applicant acted deliberately with the intent to deceive when answering questions on the 
e-QIP. I find none of the Personal Conduct Mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17 apply. I find 
against Applicant as to Personal Conduct.  
 
 “Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant's good 
reputation at work, his continued efforts to complete his college education, and his 
certification and service as an emergency medical technician.  
 
Applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment, including 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. He is not required, as a 
matter of law, to establish that he paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that 
is required is that he has a plan to resolve his financial problems and takes significant 
action to implement that plan. The entirety of his financial situation and his actions can 
reasonably be considered in evaluating the extent to which his plan to reduce his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. Available, reliable information about 
the person's behavior, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination. There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan and 
concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time.   
 
Applicant has not established a meaningful track record of debt payment 
because he has not paid most of his debts. He has sufficient monthly income as well as 
savings from the sale of his house to meet his financial obligations. Applicant had the 
opportunity to develop and demonstrate a plan to pay his delinquent debts.  He did not 
 
9 
 
 
establish a plan but just showed that he had contacted an attorney to assist him in 
resolving and paying his debts. He did not demonstrate a credible and realistic plan to 
pay his delinquent debts. He has not demonstrated that he is managing his finances 
responsibly under the circumstances. The lack of responsible action to manage past 
obligations indicates Applicant may not be concerned and responsible, but careless, in 
regard to classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I conclude 
Appellant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation and 
personal conduct, and he is not suitable for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.p:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r to 1.cc:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusions 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
