 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 08-12177 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), which he signed on July 16, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                           
 
 On April 9, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that 
specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant 
received the SOR on April 16, 2009. He signed his notarized Answer on April 27, 2009, 
in which he admitted to all the allegations in the Statement of Reasons, except 
allegation 1.a. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 4, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on June 9, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 19, 
2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 22, 2009. During the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which were marked as Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 and 2, and admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered one exhibit, 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which also was admitted without objection. I held the record 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. Department Counsel 
forwarded without objection Applicant’s timely submission of three additional exhibits, 
admitted as AE B through D. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 27, 2009. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts relating 
to Jordan, set forth in six documents, marked as exhibits GE I through VI. Applicant 
requested administrative notice of facts included in two documents, marked as AE I 
and II. Included in Applicant's post-hearing submission were two additional documents 
for administrative notice, marked as AE III and IV. The facts administratively noticed 
are limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 33 years old, was born in Jordan and immigrated to the United States 
in 1993, at the age of 17. He was not employed in Jordan before he left the country (Tr. 
30). He completed high school in the United States, and earned a double bachelor’s 
degree in information systems and operations management at a U.S. university (GE 1). 
Applicant has worked on federal contracts since 2004. He currently works in the 
 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3
                                                
information technology field for a defense contractor. He has held an interim clearance 
without incident (GE 1; Tr. 31-32). 
 
 Applicant held a Jordanian passport from 2002 to November 2007 and did not 
renew it when it expired.3 He applied for U.S. citizenship in March 2007 and was 
naturalized in June 2008. He received his U.S. passport in July 2008. He does not 
believe that he is a dual U.S.-Jordanian citizen because he renounced foreign 
citizenship when he took the U.S. citizenship oath.4 He has not traveled to Jordan since 
obtaining his U.S. passport. Applicant married in 2001. His wife, a citizen of Jordan, 
received her U.S. citizenship in April 2009. Their children, aged two and four, were born 
in the United States (GE 1, 2; Tr. 41, 69-70). 
 
 Applicant's parents, four brothers, his brothers’ families, and his in-laws are 
citizens and residents of Jordan. He also has one brother who is a citizen and resident 
of the United States. Applicant first visited his family in Jordan in 2002, after being in 
the United States for nine years. He visited his family again in 2006 and 2007. In April 
2008, he visited again when his father suffered a heart attack. Applicant has sent 
money to his family annually from approximately 2001 to the present (GE 1, 2; Tr. 30, 
46, 51, 71).  
 
Applicant’s mother is 69 years old and his father is 75. He is retired from a 
position as a driver for a private electric company. Applicant keeps in touch with his 
parents weekly by telephone. He is in touch with two of his brothers approximately 
once per year. One of these brothers formerly worked for a medical laboratory, but is 
currently unemployed. The other brother formerly worked for the Jordanian Housing 
Authority, but currently works as a security guard in a private garage. Applicant speaks 
with two other brothers more frequently, once every one to two months. One of these 
brothers is an entrepreneur who operates a day-care center. The other manages a 
supermarket. Applicant's family is aware that he is applying for a security clearance. 
Applicant has applied to the Department of Homeland Security to sponsor his family to 
become resident aliens in the United States (GE 1, 2; AE B, C, III, IV; Tr. 46-49, 53-55, 
67-68, 70-72).  
 
Applicant's wife’s parents and siblings are all Jordanian citizens and residents. 
Her family lived in the United States while one brother earned his master’s degree. 
They moved back to Jordan shortly after Applicant and his wife married in 2001. Her 
brother returned to Jordan several years later. Her father is the chief financial officer of 
a private hospital and her mother is a homemaker. Applicant's wife has one brother 
who is an accountant and one who is a car salesman. Her two sisters are 
homemakers. None of his in-laws work for the Jordanian government. Applicant’s wife 
speaks with her family about once per month, and Applicant speaks with his in-laws 
 
3 Applicant informed the investigator in his 2008 security interview that he had “submitted his foreign 
passport for cancellation” in 2007. The report contains no further details about the cancellation (GE 2). 
 
4 Jordan considers U.S.-Jordanian dual nationals to be Jordanian citizens. (GE II at p. 3). 
 
 
4
about twice per year. Applicant’s wife has applied to the Department of Homeland 
Security to sponsor her family to become resident aliens in the United States (AE B, C, 
III, IV; Tr. 55-61, 70-71). 
 
In 2006, Applicant purchased approximately ¼ acre of undeveloped land in 
Jordan as an investment. He made a down payment of $40,000 on the $80,000 price. 
He completed the purchase in 2007, after paying two installments of $20,000 each. 
Later, the downturn in the housing market made purchase of a home in the United 
States more feasible. He put the land up for sale in 2008, hoping it would provide funds 
for a down payment on a house in the United States. However, due to the recent 
financial crisis, the property remains unsold (GE 1, 2; AE D; Tr. 61-63). 
 
In April 2008, Applicant opened a checking account in Jordan with a $299 
deposit, expecting to use it to help his parents, if necessary. He provided 
documentation showing that he closed the account in May 2009. He testified that he 
authorized the bank to disburse the $299 in the account to his father (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 
63, 66-67). 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts derived from the submitted U.S. 
government publications. Jordan is a Middle Eastern country with a constitutional 
monarchy and a developing economy. It has a pro-western foreign policy and has had 
close relations with the United States for six decades. On the other hand, Jordan has 
had human rights issues, including prolonged detention, denial of due process, and 
some restrictions of freedom of speech, press, assembly, and other human rights.  
 
Jordan cooperates with the United States in fighting international terrorism. 
However, the threat of terrorism carried out by transnational and local terrorist groups 
remains high. Terrorist groups use covert, overt, and clandestine activities to 
undermine and exploit U.S. national security interests. The Jordanian government 
aggressively pursues terrorists. In recent years, terrorist plots against U.S. interests 
have been interrupted by Jordanian security forces. The parliament has passed anti-
money-laundering legislation aimed at individuals and entities that attempt to bankroll 
terrorist groups. It has also organized a state security court that specializes in cases 
involving terrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
 
 
5
                                                
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).5 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or 
is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
6
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target 
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(e): 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Although foreign family ties are not automatically disqualifying, they do raise the 
potential of foreign influence. Applicant’s parents, brothers and in-laws live in Jordan. 
He has visited Jordan four times since 2002, and he stays with his family during these 
visits. Applicant's wife also has family in Jordan. She keeps in touch with them, and 
Applicant sometimes speaks with them as well. Applicant's bank account is closed and 
no longer presents a security concern; however, his unsold ¼ acre of land represents 
an ongoing property interest. AG ¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(e) apply. 
 
The foreign influence guideline also includes factors that can mitigate 
disqualifying conditions. Under AG ¶ 8, the following mitigating conditions are relevant:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
 
 
7
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
Although Jordan has serious problems with terrorist activities, it works 
aggressively to combat terrorism. Applicant's family and in-laws do not have high-
profile jobs or connections with the government. Jordan’s relationship with the United 
States goes back decades, and its track record of cooperation makes it unlikely that it 
would exploit Applicant for information through his family. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 
8(a) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply in mitigation. Applicant maintains a relationship with 
his family in Jordan. His weekly contacts with his parents, monthly contacts with two of 
his brothers, his visits, and his monetary gifts all demonstrate his ties of affection and 
obligation to his family, which creates a potential risk of foreign influence. 
 
 However, Applicant's ties to the United States weigh in his favor when 
evaluating the question of potential conflicts of interest. After coming to the United 
States as a teenager, Applicant completed high school and earned his college degree 
here. He registered for the Selective Service, though he was not a U.S. citizen, so that 
he could assist the United States if he were needed. He married here and his children 
are native-born U.S. citizens. He is raising his family here, and hopes to buy a home in 
the near future. He has been employed for approximately ten years, and has 
contributed to federal projects since 2004. Applicant has spent half of his life in the 
United States, and has demonstrated that he intends to remain here. I conclude that he 
would choose these strong U.S. ties over his foreign connections, in the event that a 
conflict of interest arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. I find for Applicant on Guideline B. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
8
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Foreign family ties raise security concerns because of the potential for conflicts 
of interest and foreign influence. Here, Applicant’s ongoing relationship with family 
members in Jordan raises such concerns. He is in frequent contact with his parents, 
and he has traveled to Jordan four times since 2002. However, Applicant has lived half 
of his life in the United States. His education, marriage, children, and his employment 
represent deep ties to the United States. He has contributed to federal contracts since 
2004, and has held an interim security clearance with no evidence of security issues. 
Given these facts, and Applicant's significant ties to the United States, I conclude that 
he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.   
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. - 1.g.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
