                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-11147 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for sexual 
behavior, criminal conduct and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on July 11, 2008, to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
On April 9, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
(Item 1) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal 
Conduct) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on April 16, 2009. He signed a notarized Answer on 
April 29, 2009, and requested a decision without a hearing. In his Answer, Applicant 
admitted to all allegations in the SOR. On June 10, 2009, DOHA Department Counsel 
submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM) in support of the government’s preliminary 
decision to deny Applicant's request to be granted a security clearance. The FORM 
contained ten documents, identified as Items 1 through 10. The FORM and attached 
Items were forwarded to Applicant on June 12, 2009, and he received the package on 
June 23, 2009. Applicant was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to 
respond. He did not provide a response by July 23, 2009. The case was assigned to me 
on September 3, 2009, for an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 24 years old, is a single high school graduate with no children. He has 
worked for the same defense contractor since 2004. As of the date he completed his 
security clearance application, he held the position of security officer. 
 
Applicant had been friends with another boy for about eight years. On June 25, 
2005, he dressed in black pants, black shoes, and a black turtleneck sweater, and 
climbed onto the roof of his friend’s house near the bedroom window of his friend’s 14-
year-old sister. She heard movement on the roof and called her mother, who was 
downstairs. When she arrived, the mother saw hands on the gutter above her 
daughter’s bedroom window, as well as part of a pants leg, which was black. Both she 
and her daughter saw that the person on the roof was holding a mirror, which the 
mother said “was being moved as if to get a view of [victim’s] room.” The mother called 
the police to report a burglary (Items 9, 10). 
 
When the police arrived, Applicant told them that he was on the roof to play a 
trick on his friend by writing a “scary” message on his bedroom window. He was not 
carrying writing instruments. Applicant said that he was going to write it in the dirt on the 
window. He also told police that his friend might be away from home visiting someone. 
Applicant said he was looking into the sister’s room only to check if she was close 
enough to catch him on the roof. The police report noted, “When asked if he was 
looking in [victim’s] room for purposes of his own sexual gratification, [Applicant] looked 
at the ground, paused for a short time and then stated, “It’s nothing like that.” Applicant 
was handcuffed, taken in to custody in a patrol unit, and at the police station, he was 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
fingerprinted, photographed, and charged with Unlawful Sexual Contact, a 
misdemeanor (Items 7, 9, 10). 
 
 Applicant pled guilty to the charge and received a deferred sentence. He was 
also required to register as a sex offender, serve two years unsupervised probation, pay 
a fine, and complete a sex offense treatment program. Applicant paid the fine and 
completed treatment. According to the investigator’s report of investigation, the charge 
was dismissed in November 2007. Applicant is required to register each year at the 
police department. His most recent report date was July 5, 2009. He notes that his 
parents and girlfriend are aware of the arrest. The file is silent as to whether other family 
members, coworkers, or Applicant's supervisor know of the offense (Items 6, 7, 8). 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guidelines D, J, and 
E. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern under Guideline D: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 Under Guideline D, the following disqualifying conditions are relevant: AG ¶ 13(a) 
(sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been 
prosecuted) and AG ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack 
of discretion or judgment). Applicant was arrested for and pled guilty to a sexual crime. 
As a result, he is listed on his state’s registry of sex offenders and is required to update 
his registration annually. His conduct demonstrates not only a lack of discretion, but 
also a willingness to commit an illegal act to satisfy his own desires. Both disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 Two mitigating conditions are relevant: (AG ¶ 14(a) (the behavior occurred prior 
to or during adolescence and there is no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar 
nature) and AG ¶ 14(b) (the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). Applicant’s 
behavior occurred about 10 days before his 20th birthday. Although he should have 
been mature enough at that age to avoid engaging in such conduct, he may have been 
immature for his age, and some partial mitigation is available. As to AG ¶ 14(b), the 
offense occurred four years ago, and there is no evidence of similar conduct since that 
time. However, the file contains no indication that Applicant has admitted the offense. It 
appears that he continues to contend that he was playing a prank on his friend, and not 
trying to see into the sister’s bedroom. His failure to accept responsibility for his actions 
indicates a lack of rehabilitation, which raises questions as to future offenses and casts 
doubt on his current trustworthiness. AG ¶ 14(b) cannot be applied. On the whole, the 
favorable mitigation is insufficient to outweigh the disqualifying conditions. I find against 
Applicant on Guideline D. 
 
5 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern pertaining to criminal conduct is that 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. (AG ¶ 30). 
 
 AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c) 
(allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply, based on Applicant’s arrest 
and guilty plea to a misdemeanor sexual offense. 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under Guideline J have potential application: AG ¶ 
32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement) and AG ¶ 
32(c) (evidence that the person did not commit the offense).  
 
 The mitigating condition AG ¶ 32(a) is similar to AG ¶ 14(b) under the Sexual 
Behavior guideline, and the analysis is the same as discussed previously: although four 
years have passed since the offense, the fact that Applicant continues to contend that 
he was playing a prank on his friend, and was not involved in sexual misconduct, 
undermines his current trustworthiness. AG ¶ 32(a) cannot be applied. Along with 
Applicant's lack of admission and remorse for the effect of his actions on his victim, the 
file contains no evidence of other rehabilitation, such as community involvement, or 
character references from his employer, co-workers or friends. AG ¶32(d) is not 
available to mitigate Applicant's conduct. Finally, AG ¶ 32(c) does not apply. The file 
contains strong evidence that Applicant committed the offense. Applicant pled guilty to 
it, despite his continuing contention that he did not engage in inappropriate viewing of a 
minor in her bedroom. His excuse that he intended to write on his friend’s window is 
undermined by his lack of writing instruments, his apparent knowledge that his friend 
was not home to see the writing, as well as his presence near the sister’s bedroom, and 
not the friend’s bedroom. I find against Applicant on Guideline J. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
6 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
SOR ¶ 3.a. under Guideline E cross-references the 2005 sexual offense cited under 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior. Guideline E’s focus on conduct that indicates 
questionable judgment or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations is relevant 
to Applicant's behavior. His decision to view a minor female without her knowledge or 
permission, and to take planned steps to accomplish that goal—wearing dark clothes, 
carrying a mirror, climbing to a location near her bedroom—all show an intent to violate 
his friend’s trust, and to break the law, and constitute behavior that is disqualifying 
under Guideline E. 
 
 The relevant mitigating condition, AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), cannot be applied. Applicant committed a 
criminal offense, which cannot be considered minor misconduct. He also undermined an 
eight-year relationship with his friend and his friend’s family in order to satisfy his own 
desires. His lack of remorse reflects poorly on his current trustworthiness. I find against 
Applicant on Guideline E. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant was almost 20 years old when he deliberately entered the premises of 
his good friend and climbed to the roof in order to view his friend’s minor sister in her 
 
7 
 
 
bedroom. His act is not recent, and he may have been immature for his age. But 
Applicant's continued contention that he was simply playing a prank when all indications 
are otherwise, his willingness to break the law, and to violate the trust of his long-time 
friend and that friend’s family, all raise questions as to his trustworthiness and good 
judgment.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts raised by criminal sexual conduct. 
Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 3.a    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
