 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-00504 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on July 19, 2008. 
On May 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005. Applicant answered the SOR on in an undated document and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
June 11, 2009. 
 
2 
 
 
 On June 26, 2009, DOHA issued a Supplemental SOR (captioned as an 
amendment to the SOR), adding four allegations under Guideline E. Applicant 
responded to the Supplemental SOR on June 29, 2009. Department Counsel was ready 
to proceed on July 1, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on July 7, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on July 8, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 3, 2009. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but submitted no 
documentary evidence. I kept the record open until August 14, 2009, to allow him to 
submit documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
F, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX A 
through F is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on August 11, 2009. The record closed on August 14, 2009.  
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 I granted Department Counsel’s motions, without objection from Applicant, to 
correct SOR ¶ 1.d by substituting “$1,000” for “$1,00.00”, to amend SOR ¶ 1.c by 
substituting the name of Applicant’s homeowners’ association for a medical provider, 
and to change the amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e from $147 to $913 (Tr. 27-28, 103-06). 
The amendments are handwritten on the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 
1.g, 1.h, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, and Supplemental SOR ¶ 2.d. His admissions in his answer and 
at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old security officer employed by a federal contractor. He 
has worked for his current employer since July 2008. According to his current 
supervisor, he shows “utmost respect” to his co-workers and supervisors, is enthusiastic 
about his duties, and has not had any disciplinary problems (AX D). 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from July 1979 to July 1982. He attended 
college part-time from about September 1985 to August 2003, and he received a 
bachelor of science degree (GX 1 at 2; GX 2 at 6; Tr. 44-45). He received a security 
clearance in December 1983, and it was revalidated in August 1990 and March 1994. 
He was married in June 1992 and legally separated in April 2007. 
 
 In December 1999, Applicant applied for a federal job. He answered “no” to all 
drug-use questions on his application. In June 2000, he was offered a job, conditioned 
on a favorable background investigation. During a personal background interview on 
July 6, 2000, Applicant admitted using marijuana at his high school graduation in 1979, 
but he denied any other drug use. At some time on or after July 6, 2000, he submitted a 
supplement to his application, disclosing some unfavorable employment and financial 
information and a speeding ticket, but not disclosing any illegal drug use (GX 7 at 1). 
Neither the initial application nor the supplement to the application was offered in 
 
3 
 
 
evidence, but Applicant’s answers are described in a narrative report from the agency 
that received them. On the same day as his interview, he submitted a urine sample for 
drug testing. The sample tested positive for cocaine (GX 7 at 2). 
 
By letter dated July 28, 2000, Applicant was notified that the agency’s conditional 
job offer was rescinded because of the positive drug test (GX 7 at 1, 2, and 6). Applicant 
testified he received a call asking if he had been to the dentist and informing him his 
urine sample was “dirty,” but he denied being told his urine was “dirty” with cocaine, and 
he denied receiving a letter rescinding the job offer (Tr. 49, 80-81, 87-88).  
 
After the federal job offer was rescinded, Applicant continued to work for a non-
government employer until August 2001. He was unemployed from August to December 
2001, and April 2006 to July 2008. During his periods of unemployment, he worked part-
time from home as a computer repairman and withdrew funds from his retirement 
accounts (GX 1 at 3; GX 2 at 6; Tr. 45).  
 
 During his unemployment from April 2006 to July 2008, Applicant accumulated 
numerous delinquent debts. The table below summarizes the evidence regarding the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Homeowners’ Assn. 
(Judgment, Jan 07) 
$695 Paid GX 3 at 7 
1.b Homeowners’ Assn. 
(Judgment, May 06) 
$914 Paid GX 3 at 9 
1.c Homeowners’ Assn. 
(Judgment, Aug 05) 
$939 Paid GX 3 at 6 
1.d Musical Instruments  $1,000 Making payments GX 3 at 12; AX C 
1.e Music Store $913 Same debt as 1.d Tr. 62 
1.f Child Support $2,110 Paid (garnishment) AX A at 10; Tr. 46-47 
1.g Home Mortgage $52,118 Payments current GX 3 at 13; Tr. 47 
1.h Home Equity Loan $10,588 Payments current AX A at 11; Tr. 71 
1.i Homeowners’ Assn. 
(Judgment, Feb 03) 
$232 Paid GX 4 at 2; GX 6 at 3 
1.j Homeowners’ Assn. 
(Judgment, May 08) 
$799 Paid GX 3 at 11 
1.k Collection Agency $949 Same debt as 1.d Tr. 62 
1.l Student Loan $4,000 Deferred GX 6 at 10; Tr.33 
1.m Cell Phone Bill $579 Making payments AX F; Tr. 48 
1.n Home Mortgage $52,879 Same debt as 1.g Tr. 33, 47 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that drugs are not part of his life. On cross-
examination by Department Counsel, he testified as follows: 
 
DEPARTMENT COUNSEL (DC): Okay. Now, [Applicant], you deny that 
you have ever used cocaine? 
 
4 
 
 
APPLICANT: Yes. 
 
DC: You’ve never used cocaine in your life? 
 
APPLICANT: If so, I don’t remember. It might have been a mistake, but 
not in my knowledge. 
 
DC: What do you mean it might have been a mistake? 
 
APPLICANT: If it was done, I – I guess you’re talking ten years ago. I don’t 
know exactly what with parties – I know I had past drug tests before. 
Again, that’s why I mentioned that he asked me had I been to a dentist. 
 
.  .  . 
 
DC: You testified that it may have been possible that you were using 
cocaine ten years ago. 
 
APPLICANT: It may have been, but I’m not sure and that’s why I really 
basically put down that I denied because I don’t really use drugs. 
 
DC: Are you unsure if you’ve used – if you were using cocaine? 
 
APPLICANT: At that time, I am not sure. Not sure. 
 
DC: When have you used cocaine? 
 
APPLICANT: That I don’t even know. 
 
DC: But, there has been a time when you have used cocaine? 
 
APPLICANT: Again, that I don’t remember. 
 
DC: But, it’s a possibility? 
 
APPLICANT: It may be possible, but I’m not sure. 
 
.  .  . 
 
DC; Now, if there was a point that you may have used cocaine, where 
would you have gotten it from: 
 
APPLICANT: You asked me something that I don’t remember. 
 
(Tr. 76-80.) 
 
5 
 
 
Department Counsel later asked Applicant if he had ever used any illegal drugs. 
He admitted he used marijuana once at his high school graduation in 1979 (Tr. 85). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
6 
 
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts, including four unsatisfied judgments. The 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised by an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” 
Applicant’s financial history raises these three disqualifying conditions, shifting the 
burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts were numerous, persisted until 
recently, and did not occur under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
 
7 
 
 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s periods of 
unemployment were beyond his control. There is no evidence that his unemployment 
from April 2006 to July 2008 was related to his positive urinalysis in December 1999. He 
acted reasonably, attempting to earn money by self-employment, continuing to seek full-
time employment, and using his retirement funds to pay living expenses. I conclude AG 
¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive. If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control. However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. Applicant is not enrolled 
in a credit counseling program, but his financial problems are being resolved. I conclude 
AG ¶ 20(c) is established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of each 
and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 
2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. Id.  
 
 Applicant has paid or negotiated repayment plans for all the debts alleged in the 
SOR. He is gainfully employed and financially stable. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is 
established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The Supplemental SOR alleges Applicant falsified an employment application for 
federal employment and a supplement to that application by not disclosing his cocaine 
use (Supplemental SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). It also alleges he falsified his responses during 
an interview on July 6, 2000, by denying any illegal drug involvement other than his 
one-time marijuana use in 1979 (Supplemental SOR ¶ 2.c), and he tested positive for 
cocaine during a pre-employment urinalysis on July 6, 2000 (Supplemental SOR ¶ 
2.d).The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
8 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) is relevant to the falsifications alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. It is raised by: 
 
[D]eliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(b) is relevant to the falsification alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2.c. It is raised by “deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.” 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission or misstatement, standing alone, does not 
prove an intentional falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission or misstatement. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his employment application, his 
supplement to his employment application, and his answers during a follow-up 
interview. The record does not contain the employment application submitted by 
Applicant in December 1999. Thus, I cannot determine whether it asked whether he had 
ever illegally used a controlled substance, or whether it was similar to the SF 86 and 
asked if he had done so within the last seven years. The SOR does not allege that his 
failure to disclose his marijuana use was a falsification. Instead, it alleges only that his 
failure to disclose any cocaine use was a falsification. However, Applicant’s positive 
urinalysis in July 2000 does not establish that he had used cocaine more than six 
months earlier when he submitted his application. In the absence of evidence showing 
the scope of the questions on his employment application and the absence of evidence 
that Applicant used cocaine before December 1999, I conclude that the falsification 
alleged in Supplemental SOR ¶ 2.a is not established by substantial evidence. 
 
 The record reflects that Applicant was interviewed on July 6, 2000, the day of his 
urinalysis, and he submitted the supplement to his employment application on or after 
the date of the interview. Although Applicant denied falsifying the supplement and his 
answers during the interview, his denial is contradicted by the positive urinalysis and his 
 
9 
 
 
evasive answers at the hearing about his cocaine use. The credibility of his hearing 
testimony claiming lack of memory about a nine-year-old use of cocaine is undermined 
by his very specific memory of using marijuana at his high school graduation, more than 
20 years ago. His claim that he was never notified of his positive urinalysis is 
implausible, contradicted by the government’s documentary evidence, and not 
persuasive. I conclude that the allegations in Supplemental SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c are 
established by substantial evidence, and that the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a) 
and 16(b) are raised. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to the illegal 
cocaine use alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
Applicant’s cocaine use shortly before his urinalysis in July 2000 and his repeated 
efforts to conceal his cocaine use are sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶ 16(c) and 16(e). 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). It appears that Applicant may have volunteered the information 
about his marijuana use during his interview in July 2000, but he made no efforts to 
correct his omissions and misleading answers regarding his cocaine use. To the 
contrary, he persisted in his falsifications at the hearing. This mitigating condition is 
established for the omission of his marijuana use on his employment application, but not 
for his repeated failures to disclose his cocaine use.  
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Illegal drug use is a serious offense, but Applicant’s use of cocaine was nine years ago 
and there is no evidence it has been repeated. His isolated use of cocaine is mitigated, 
but his repeated falsifications to conceal it are not. 
 
10 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has 
persistently refused to acknowledge his cocaine use. 
 
 Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 
17(e). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has done nothing 
to reduce his vulnerability. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He has served his country for many 
years, both in and out of uniform. He has held a clearance for many years, apparently 
without incident. He has overcome the financial adversity triggered by a substantial 
period of unemployment. His lack of candor about his cocaine use, however, raises 
grave doubts about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his financial history and his isolated cocaine use, but he has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his intentional concealment of his cocaine 
use. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
 
11 
 
 
consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR and 
the Supplemental SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 SOR Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    For Applicant 
 
  
Supplemental SOR Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
