                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00651 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 10, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 28, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on August 18, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and did not offer any 
documentary evidence. The record was held open until August 25, 2009, to allow 
Applicant an opportunity to submit documents. He did so timely, and it was marked as 
Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection.1 DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on August 25, 2009.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government moved to amend the SOR by striking SOR ¶ 1.b because it was 
a duplicate of ¶ 1.a. There was no objection and the motion was granted. For simplicity 
the allegations will not be renumbered and ¶ 1.b will not be considered.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. He 
denied the remaining allegation in ¶ 1.c. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2003. He has been 
working for his current employer, a federal contractor, since August 2008. He is 
divorced and has one child, for whom he provides child support. He served in the Army 
Reserve from 1997 to 2009 and was honorably discharged.2  
 
 In 2004, Applicant resigned from his job and moved to a new city (City A). He 
had difficulty finding a new job, but was confident he could get one. He was out of work 
a couple of months. In June 2004, Applicant purchased a house in City A. He used 
$20,000 from his savings as a down payment. He got a job in July 2004 in a different 
city (City B), so he moved. His sister (Sister C) lived in the house in City A and was 
responsible for making the mortgage payments.3  
 
 Applicant bought a second house in City B, where he now worked. He did not put 
a down payment on the house. He obtained a mortgage with an adjustable rate of 
interest (ARM). He obtained two loans for the house with an 80% and 20% financing 
split. Sister C experienced financial difficulties and could not afford the $1,300 mortgage 
payment on the house in City A. She fell four months behind in payments. Applicant 
paid the back payments and told his sister she would have to move out. A second sister 
(Sister D) moved into the house and took over the mortgage payments. She and her 
husband experienced financial difficulties and fell behind in paying the mortgage. They 
were three months delinquent. Applicant obtained an equity line of credit for $30,000 
1 HE I. 
 
2 Tr. 63-66. 
 
3 Tr. 28-32. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
(SOR ¶ 1.g) and used this money to pay the mortgage, do repairs on the house and pay 
other bills. He then rented the house to non-family members.4  
 
 In 2006, Applicant’s uncle was in an accident. His mother asked him to lend her 
money so she could visit her brother. He gave her two credit cards to finance her 
expenses. She made travel and hotel purchases of approximately $6,000 and $8,900 
using the credit cards. He also gave her approximately $7,000 in cash. She was 
supposed to make the minimum payments on the credit cards, until she could pay them 
in full. She incurred these bills over a six-month period. Applicant was aware that she 
was not making any payments during this time. He thought she would keep her promise 
and make payments, but she did not. She never paid anything. He paid one of the credit 
cards and still owes about $4,400 on the remaining card. This debt is not on the SOR.5 
 
When Applicant missed a payment on the equity loan (SOR 1.g) on the house in 
City A, his interest rate increased and he could not make payments on his other debts, 
including the credit card debts his mother incurred. After two years, his ARM on the City 
B house increased. He had anticipated when he bought the house with the ARM that he 
would refinance the mortgage at a later date at a lower rate. Instead, the conventional 
rates had increased and he was unable to refinance the loan at a lower rate. He could 
not afford to keep the house in City A. He later realized he could no longer afford the 
house in City B.6 
 
 In 2006, Sister C told Applicant she would help their mother pay the credit card 
debt his mother incurred in his name. In order to get the job she needed to help pay this 
debt she would need a car. So Applicant co-signed on a car loan for Sister C because 
she could not obtain a loan in her name. The car cost $17,000. The agreement was that 
Applicant would pay $100 a month for six months to help her with the car payments and 
she was responsible for the remaining amount. Applicant stated he knew he could not 
afford the full payment. Sister C did not make payments for five months. Applicant made 
payments to catch-up. She told him she would try and make the payments, but did not. 
The loan company contacted him and he advised them he could not afford the car and 
they repossessed it. He understood he would likely owe the deficiency balance. SOR 
1.c ($9,609) is the car debt. Applicant settled the debt for $4,000. He paid the 
settlement with a tax refund.7  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is the 20% equity loan on the City B house. SOR ¶ 1.d is the 80% 
mortgage on the City B house. SOR ¶ 1.g is the equity loan on the City A house. SOR ¶ 
1.f is the mortgage for the City A house. Applicant has an agreement with the creditor in 
4 Tr. 32-39. 
 
5 Tr. 21-26, 39, 84-88. This debt will not be considered for disqualifying purposes but will be 
considered when considering Applicant financial history and analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
6 Tr. 41-42, 47, 73-74. 
 
7 Tr. 43-46, 68-71; Answer to SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
SOR ¶ 1.a to pay $854 a month for 12 months to settle the debt. He has made four 
payments so far.8 
 
Applicant settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($32,000) for $1,300 a month for six 
months. He stated he has made five payments. He provided documents to show four 
payments have been made.9 
 
Applicant stated that the properties in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($154,000) and 1.f ($146,000) 
were foreclosed and sold. There is no balance remaining on them.10  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a credit card debt for an account opened in 2006, and defaulted in 
late 2007 or early 2008. Applicant stated the account was sold and he has attempted to 
determine the collection creditor, but has been unsuccessful. He stated he last 
attempted to contact the creditor in February 2009. He intends to pay this debt. He is 
attending school and his employer reimburses him for the amount of his student loan he 
obtained to go to school. He will use the student loan money to pay his debts after his 
company reimburses him. Then he plans to pay off the student loans.11  
 
Applicant has a budget on a spread sheet. He has not attended formal financial 
counseling, but has read things on his own and has had financial classes when he 
attended college. He also familiarized himself, when he was in the military, with financial 
issues because he was responsible for advising young soldiers about potential financial 
pitfalls.12  
 
Applicant has about $2,400 in savings. He owns a Roth IRA that has about 
$5,000 and a 401k with about $4,000. He makes monthly contributions to his 401k 
account. He has one active credit card.13  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
8 Tr. 37-41, 50-55; GE3; AE A. 
 
9 Tr. 52-55, 58; AE A 
 
10 Tr. 47-50, 61-63. 
 
11 Tr. 59-61, 90-93. 
 
12 Tr. 84-86. 
 
13 Tr. 80-81. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:   
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant defaulted on mortgages for two houses he purchased. He defaulted on 
a car loan and has a credit card debt that remains unpaid. He was unable or unwilling to 
pay his debts because he was financially overextended. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has a history of poor judgment and irresponsible behavior when 
dealing with his finances. He bought a house while unemployed. He then purchased a 
second house. His sister was responsible for making mortgage payments and failed to 
do so. He then co-signed on a loan for this sister to purchase a car, which she then 
failed to make the payments on. He already was aware of her unreliability in making 
payments on the mortgage. He gave his mother unlimited use of two of his credit cards. 
He was aware she was not making payments on the cards as promised, but continued 
to allow her to increase the debt. He obtained an ARM knowing the rates could 
increase, but he expected them to decrease and then planned to refinance the loan. 
When they increased he could not afford the mortgage payments. Applicant has since 
defaulted on the mortgages on two houses which were then foreclosed. He defaulted on 
the car loan and defaulted on one of the credit cards. Applicant’s financial problems are 
still current because he is still resolving a credit card debt. Although many of his debts 
involved his family, he was aware of their erratic financial history. These financial 
problems were ultimately a result of behavior within his control. He did not act 
responsibly under the circumstances, but rather continued to use poor judgment which 
further exacerbated his financial woes. I find mitigating conditions (a) and (b) do not 
apply.  
 
Applicant stated he is somewhat self-taught regarding financial issues and in the 
past was responsible for counseling young soldiers to ensure they did not get into 
financial problems. Therefore, this is not a case of a person being duped, but rather is a 
situation where he took financial risks by assuming more debt than he could handle and 
repeatedly relying on family members to make payments, even when he was aware of 
their past irresponsible actions. Applicant has payment plans to settle two of his debts, 
but he still owes a large debt that he has not made any payments on. I find mitigating 
condition (d) partially applies because of his settlement payments. I find mitigating 
condition (c) does not apply because even though it is apparent to Applicant that he has 
made serious financial mistakes, he has not sought financial counseling to help him 
prevent future errors. Applicant has developed a consistent pattern of poor financial 
decisions that left a wake of foreclosure, defaults and delinquent debts. Without a 
consistent record of responsible behavior it is too early to conclude the problem is under 
control or being resolved. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the military and 
was honorably discharged. He consistently pays his child support. He has developed a 
pattern of poor decision making and irresponsible behavior regarding his finances that 
raises questions about his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. He repeatedly 
overextended his finances and then defaulted on his obligations. The debts he settled 
were for less than he actually received. He has not developed a consistent track record 
of responsible behavior. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
