1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-01094
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant fell behind on his debt payments in 2006. By early 2007, he had
accrued approximately $45,000 of delinquent debt. In September 2007, he filed for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. Since then, he has satisfied nearly half of the SOR
delinquencies through the plan in steady, monthly payments. Applicant has mitigated
the financial considerations security concern. Clearance is granted.
On April 1, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR on April 29, 2009, admitted all of the allegations,
and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2009. On June 11,
2009, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for July 7, 2009. The hearing
was conducted as scheduled. I received seven government exhibits, one Applicant
exhibit, and Applicant’s testimony. The transcript was received on July 15, 2009.
Preliminary Ruling
SOR subparagraph 1.i, alleges as follows: 
You are indebted to [home mortgage company] on an account that was
placed for collection in the approximate amount of $243,000.
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the allegation, as follows:
You are indebted to [home mortgage company] on an account in the
approximate amount of $243,000. As of March 10, 2009, a monthly
mortgage payment of approximately $2,086 was approximately 30 days
past due, and had been referred for collection (Tr. 9).
Applicant did not object to the proposed amendment, and I granted the motion.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old single man who lives with his elderly mother. He
earned a bachelor of science degree in engineering technology in 1989 (Tr. 16). For the
past nine years, he has worked for a defense contractor as the lead material engineer
for an aircraft carrier (Tr. 28). His job duties include designing and overseeing the
installation of high-efficiency lighting fixtures on aircraft carriers (Tr. 17).
In the mid-2000s, Applicant decided to finance extensive home renovations.
Also, he spent between ten and twelve thousand dollars on new furniture, (Tr. 52). In
2006, he purchased several more “big-ticket” items including a car, a flat screen
television, and some jewelry (Tr. 37, 61).
Applicant gradually became financially overextended. He then began using
payday loans to satisfy his debts (Tr. 42). Each time his finances “came up short,” he
obtained another payday loan (Id.). Also, he refinanced his home multiple times,
cashing out the equity to supplement his income (Tr. 62). Each time he refinanced, the
mortgage’s interest rate increased (Tr. 59). By 2009, the interest rate had increased to
10.3 per cent (Tr. 45, 67).
By early 2007, Applicant had accrued approximately $45,000 of delinquent debt,
as listed in the SOR (see generally, Answer). In May 2007, Applicant filed for Chapter
13 bankruptcy protection (Answer at 1). The court dismissed the case in July 2007 after
Applicant failed to make a payment on time (Exhibit 3 at 7).
3
Applicant re-filed the Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in September 2007 (Id. at
24; Tr. 57). The bankruptcy petition included all of the SOR debts. Under the new
Chapter 13 plan, Applicant was to pay approximately $70,000, including the SOR debts,
other debts not listed in the SOR, and miscellaneous fees (Id. at 37-45). Between
September 2007 and April 2008, Applicant paid $9,500 into the plan through regular,
monthly payments (Id. at 46). 
On March 26, 2008, Applicant filed a motion to modify the bankruptcy petition to
enable him to pay automatically through monthly wage garnishments (Id. at 28). The
court granted the motion. Since then, he has paid $1,692 per month through wage
garnishments under the plan, and any income tax refunds have been applied to the plan
(Id. at 46; Exhibit A). Also, he has made approximately $3,000 of periodic payments in
addition to the wage garnishment payments (Id.). By the hearing date, he had paid,
approximately $31,500 into the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. 
As part of the bankruptcy process, the court required Applicant to attend a
financial counseling session in mid-2007 (Tr. 43, 55). He learned how to organize a
budget, and to develop strategies to control his spending (Tr. 43). 
At some point during the past two years, Applicant missed a property tax
payment (Tr. 63-64). At or about that time, the state where Applicant resides, increased
the property tax rate (Tr. 63). Before this time, Applicant had been paying his property
taxes separately from his mortgage. After Applicant missed the property tax payment,
the mortgagor increased the escrow portion of Applicant’s monthly mortgage payments
to include property taxes (Id.; Exhibit 3 at 4). Applicant was unable to afford the
increased mortgage payment. By March 2009, his mortgage payments became
delinquent (Exhibit 3 at 15).
In May 2009, Applicant retained an attorney to negotiate a loan modification (Tr.
47). Through his attorney, Applicant is working to consolidate the delinquent amount
into the amount due under the modified loan (Tr. 65). His attorney has notified the
mortgage company that Applicant will not be making any additional mortgage payments
until the loan modification is completed (Tr. 63, 67).
Applicant earns $62,000 annually (Tr. 44). He has no credit cards (Tr. 50). To
supplement his income, Applicant obtained a part-time job in 2007 (Tr. 29; 67). Also, he
earns additional income as a blood plasma donor (Tr. 67). He has altered his lifestyle,
spending less on entertainment. He has approximately $200 of after-expense monthly
income (Tr. 50). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
4
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Applicant readily acknowledges that irresponsible spending caused his financial
delinquencies. Further, he is still satisfying his delinquencies through the Chapter 13
bankruptcy process. Neither AG ¶¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstance that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” nor
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances,” apply.
Applicant has been satisfying his delinquencies with substantial monthly
payments through the bankruptcy process for two years. He has paid approximately
$31,500 into the plan, nearly half the amount due. In the past 18 months, he has made
5
approximately $3,000 of payments in excess of the payments required under the
garnishment. He has internalized the lessons learned from the court’s mandatory
financial counseling session, budgeting his money, altering his lifestyle, and obtaining a
part-time job to supplement his income. 
Applicant’s accrual of a mortgage delinquency while the Chapter 13 bankruptcy
payment plan is still ongoing raises a concern as to whether he has truly rehabilitated
his finances. This concern is outweighed by the amount of time Applicant has been
satisfying his debts through the Chapter 13 plan, the amount of debt paid through the
plan, the efforts Applicant has taken to supplement his income, and the steps Applicant
has taken to resolve the mortgage delinquency. AG ¶¶ 20(c), “the person has received
or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control,” and 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant accrued substantial debt purchasing luxury items such as flat-screen
televisions and furniture. As his debt became unmanageable, he compounded the
problem by obtaining payday loans. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct
is significant.
The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct is outweighed by the
presence of rehabilitation, however. Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection
and has paid $31,500 into the bankruptcy plan through consistent monthly payments for
two years. Applicant’s current, delinquent mortgage status does not alter this
conclusion. He has confronted his debts aggressively through the Chapter 13 process,
paying $3,000 more than the plan’s scheduled payments. Moreover, the mortgage
delinquency was caused in part by an increase in the escrow portion of the mortgage
generated by a state property tax increase. Also, the mortgage delinquency has
remained outstanding at Applicant’s attorney’s instruction while loan modification
6
negotiations are pending. Once the modification is finalized, Applicant’s delinquency will
be consolidated into the amount due under the modified loan. 
Applicant has made permanent behavioral changes, cutting back on
entertainment expenses and foregoing credit cards. He has obtained a part-time job to
supplement his income. Upon considering the relevant disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of the whole person concept, I conclude the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence of Applicant’s financial problems is minimal. Applicant has mitigated the
financial considerations security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.o: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
