 
1 
 
 
                        
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07565 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
  
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under the financial considerations adjudicative 
guideline but failed to mitigate security concerns under the foreign influence adjudicative 
guideline.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                    Statement of the Case 
  
On June 9, 2009, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant an undated Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, Guideline F, Financial Considerations, 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 22, 2011, DOHA received Applicant’s answer to the SOR. In his 
answer, Applicant provided additional information and requested a hearing before a 
DOHA administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2011. On 
January 23, 2012, I convened a hearing to consider whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.   
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits (Ex. 1 through   
Ex. 5), which were entered in the record without objection. The Government also offered 
for administrative notice a summary memorandum containing facts about the People’s 
Republic of China (China) found in 15 official U.S. Government documents. The 
Government also provided for administrative notice the 15 source documents from 
which the facts in the summary memorandum were derived. I marked the Government’s 
summary memorandum as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant did not object to my taking 
notice of the facts about China in the summary memorandum or in the source 
documents. 
 
Applicant testified and called one witness. He introduced five exhibits, which 
were identified as Ex. A through Ex. E and admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on January 30, 2012. 
 
                                     Procedural Matters 
 
The SOR contained one allegation of disqualifying conduct under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. At the hearing, the Government moved to amend the SOR by 
striking the Guideline E allegation (SOR ¶ 3.a.). Without objection, the Government’s 
motion was granted. (Tr. 12-13.)  
                                                    
                                                      Findings of Fact 
 
 The amended SOR contains six allegations under AG B, Foreign Influence (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.) and three allegations under AG F, Financial Considerations. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the six AG B allegations. He admitted one AG F 
allegation (SOR ¶ 2.c.). He denied the AG F allegations at SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b. and 
provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including Applicant’s testimony, 
all exhibits, all relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 49 years old, a native-born U.S. citizen, and employed as an 
engineering technician by a government contractor. In 1982, Applicant enlisted in the 
U.S. military and served in the active reserves until 1984. In 1984, he enlisted in another 
 
3 
 
 
branch of the U.S. military and served on active duty until 1990, when he received an 
honorable discharge. At times during his military service, Applicant held a security 
clearance. (Ex. 1; Tr. 34-35.) 
 
                                                Financial Considerations 
 
 In 1996, Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree. From 1997 until 2006, Applicant 
was employed as a senior technician by a company. His employer fired him over a 
quality control issue. Applicant was subsequently unemployed from May 2006 until 
about December 2006, when he started his own insurance business. In October 2007, 
he discontinued his insurance business because he was unable to make a living from it.  
In November 2007, Applicant acquired a position as a contract employee at a business. 
He worked there as a technician until about October 2008, when the contract ended, 
business slowed down, and his employer let him go. Applicant was then unemployed 
again from October 2008 until June 2009, when he acquired his present employment. 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 36-38.) 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment in 2007 and his unsuccessful insurance business 
venture caused him to fall behind on his financial obligations. In about November 2007, 
he sought help from a debt consolidation service and agreed to make payments of $550 
a month to satisfy his delinquent debts. He made the payments until he became 
unemployed again. He notified the debt consolidation service of his unemployment. 
When he found employment again, he also notified the debt consolidation service and 
resumed monthly payments. Applicant estimated that he made approximately 18 
monthly payments totaling $10,000 through the debt consolidation service. (Tr. 39-41.) 
 
 While he was making payments through the debt consolidation service, Applicant 
received notice that another creditor had executed a garnishment order against his 
salary. Applicant tried to negotiate with the creditor, but he was unsuccessful. Applicant 
lacked sufficient income to pay the debt consolidation service and satisfy the 
garnishment. In June 2010, he filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In September 
2010, Applicant’s debts were discharged by the bankruptcy court. (Ex. 5; Tr. 41-42.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was responsible for two unresolved delinquent 
debts, one for $8,690 (SOR ¶ 2.a.) and another for $8,574 (SOR ¶ 2.b.). In his answer 
to the SOR, Applicant asserted that both debts should have been settled in his 
bankruptcy. At his hearing, Applicant reported that he had consulted his bankruptcy 
attorney and reviewed his bankruptcy petition. He learned that because of clerical error, 
the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 2.a. was not included in the bankruptcy. Applicant’s credit 
report revealed that the debt had been charged off and the account closed. The debt 
had not been paid, and the creditor no longer sought payment. (Ex. D; Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 Applicant reported that he had used a telephone number provided on his July 
2009 credit report in an attempt to contact the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 2.b. He 
learned that the creditor’s telephone number had been disconnected. He further 
explained that in November 2011, he contacted the credit bureau to report his inability 
 
4 
 
 
to reach the creditor at the number provided on his credit report. Applicant’s credit 
bureau report of January 2012 no longer lists the debt. (Ex. 4; Ex. D; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant reported that his net monthly salary averaged $3,600. His monthly 
expenses include the following: rent, $1,275; groceries, $350; clothing, $40; utilities, 
$300; car expense, $250; life and other insurance, $70; and, miscellaneous, $350. 
Applicant also pays $270 each month on a student loan debt. Applicant’s net monthly 
remainder is $695. His wife has been unemployed since June 2010. (Ex. 3; Tr. 46-48, 
63.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have one credit card, and they pay the existing balance in 
full each month. Applicant has $1,000 in bank savings and $5,100 in his 401(k) 
retirement account. He owns two automobiles which he values at $3,500. (Ex. 3; Tr. 46-
48.) 
 
                                                     Foreign Influence 
 
 In 1998, Applicant met the woman who would become his wife. The woman, who 
came to the United States in 1992, was born and raised in the People’s Republic of 
China (PRC or China). As a student in the PRC, she earned bachelor’s and master’s 
degrees in mathematics. Applicant and the woman married in 1999. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 
49.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife holds two master’s degrees from U.S. universities. She studied 
for a Ph.D. in applied mathematics, but did not complete the degree. She has taught 
occasionally at the community college level in the United States. She is currently 
studying to become an actuary and hopes to acquire a job with an insurance company.  
(Ex. 2; Tr. 48, 57, 62.)  
 
 On his e-QIP, Applicant listed his wife as a dual citizen of the U.S. and the PRC. 
Applicant’s wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006. She has a PRC passport, 
but it has expired. Since coming to the U.S. in 1992, Applicant’s wife has returned only 
once to the PRC. That trip, which she took in the company of Applicant, occurred in 
2007, and she used only her U.S. passport for the trip.1 (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Ex. E; Tr. 58, 69-
71.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of the PRC. 
Both individuals are in their 70s and retired. Applicant’s mother-in-law worked as a 
mathematics teacher at a community college. Applicant’s father-in-law was the chief 
executive officer of a refrigeration company. Applicant’s parents-in-law came to the 
United States once, in 1998, to visit their daughter. (Ex. 2; Tr. 63-64, 70.) 
 
                                            
1 In order to obtain a visa from the PRC for her trip, Applicant’s wife was required to submit her active 
PRC passport and her U.S. passport to PRC authorities for identification. (Tr. 71.) 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s wife has two sisters, two brothers-in-law, and one uncle who are 
citizens and residents of the PRC. The older sister works in retail sales, and her 
husband is a cafeteria manager. They have one child, a daughter, who is 17 years old. 
About five years ago, Applicant’s wife initiated sponsorship proceedings for her sister 
and her family for immigration to the United States. She estimates that it may take 
another five years before her sister and her family are granted permission to enter the 
United States. (Tr. 65, 68-69.) 
 
 The younger sister works for a bank, and her husband works as a magazine 
editor. They have a son who is in elementary school. (Tr. 65-66.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s uncle works for a provincial government and is a manager of a 
manufacturing enterprise. Applicant’s wife last saw her uncle when she visited the PRC 
in 2007. (Ex. 2; Tr. 69-72.)  
 
 Applicant’s wife speaks with her parents by telephone about once a week. She 
also calls and speaks with her parents and her sisters on holidays. Applicant’s wife 
communicates with her sisters by e-mail. (Tr. 64-65.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts, which appear in official U.S. 
government documents: 
 
People’s Republic of China (China or PRC) 
 
China does not recognize dual citizenship. Any Chinese national who has been 
naturalized as a foreign citizen will lose his or her Chinese citizenship and may 
encounter problems if attempting to enter the PRC on a Chinese passport. (U.S. 
Department of State, China – Country Specific Information, dated November 10, 2011, 
at 4.)  
 
China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist 
Party. “[I]n all important government, economic, and cultural institutions in China, party 
committees work to see that party and state policy guidance is followed and that non-
party members do not create autonomous organizations that could challenge party 
rule.” (U.S. Department of State, Background Note: China, dated September 6, 2011, at 
7.) 
 
In its 2009 Annual Report to Congress, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission concluded that “China is the most aggressive country conducting 
espionage against the United States, focusing on obtaining U.S. information and 
technologies beneficial to China’s military modernization and economic development.” 
Multiple Chinese state entities are engaged in an active effort to acquire restricted U.S. 
technologies; the Chinese government also encourages and rewards the actions of 
private individuals who obtain technology on its behalf. Agents of the Chinese 
government are also displaying an increasing willingness to offer financial inducements 
to U.S. government officials in order to encourage them to compromise classified 
 
6 
 
 
information. Recent data released by the U.S. Department of Justice indicated that, for 
cases resulting in Federal prosecutions during fiscal years 2007 and 2008, China was 
ranked second only to Iran as the leading destination for illegal exports of restricted U.S. 
technology. (U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2009 Report to 
Congress dated November 2009, at 165.) 
 
The U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission also noted that 
Chinese intelligence agents are known to target not only Chinese-Americans for 
enterprise-directed espionage, but also U.S. citizens of other ethnic backgrounds. The 
most common approach used on such targets is to arouse feelings of obligation toward 
China. (2009 Annual Report to Congress, at 150, 165.) 
 
The U.S. Department of State’s 2010 Human Rights Report: China (includes 
Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau), dated April 8, 2011, provides the following details 
specifying China’s poor human rights record: 
 
arbitrary or unlawful killings by security forces; physical abuse and torture 
of prisoners; arbitrary arrest and detention; denial of fair public trials; 
searches of premises without warrants; monitoring of communication 
(including telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text 
messaging, and Internet communications), opening of domestic and 
international mail, and failure to respect freedom of speech and the press; 
failure to respect academic and artistic freedom; severe restrictions on 
peaceful assembly and restrictions on freedom of association; restrictions 
on the freedom of religion; and [denying]citizens . . . the right to change 
their government peaceably, or change the laws and officials that govern 
them. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
 
7 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
 
8 
 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information;  
 
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of                               
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c) are raised in this case. Applicant’s wife, who was born, 
raised, and educated in the PRC, is now a U.S. citizen2 and resides with him in the 
United States. However, her parents, her two sisters and their husbands, and her uncle 
are citizens and residents of the PRC. The uncle works for a provincial government in 
the PRC. Applicant’s wife has close connections with her parents and sisters living in 
China. She communicates with her parents by telephone once a week. She e-mails her 
two sisters, and she is sponsoring one of her sisters for immigration to the United 
States.     
 
Applicant’s wife’s frequent communications with her family members in the PRC 
reflect her ties of affection with them. “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s 
spouse.” ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant provided no 
information to rebut the presumption. His wife’s relationships with her parents and her 
siblings are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” These relationships with residents of China create 
                                            
2 The PRC does not recognize dual citizenship. Accordingly, I conclude the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.a. for 
Applicant.  
 
9 
 
 
a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and [his] desire to help” his wife’s family members who are in 
the PRC. For example, the Chinese Government could subject Applicant to potential, 
indirect coercion through his spouse’s relationship with her parents, sisters, brothers-in-
law, and uncle in the PRC. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of China with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his wife’s 
contacts with her family members living in China do not pose a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.   
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
10 
 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant’s wife has frequent 
contact with her parents, siblings, and her sibling’s spouses, all of whom live in China. 
Because of his wife’s contacts with her family members in the PRC, Applicant is not 
able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his spouse’s 
relationships with relatives who are Chinese citizens] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.” 
    
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant is a native-born 
U.S. citizen, who served in the U.S. military and received an honorable discharge.   
 
However, Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed 
against the potential conflict of interest created by his and his wife’s relationships with 
her family members who live in China. Applicant’s spouse frequently communicates with 
her parents and her siblings. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Chinese 
Government, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant 
or his wife’s family members in China to coerce Applicant or his family for classified or 
sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or 
Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or 
exploitation. While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence was present, Applicant would have a heavy 
evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is 
important to be mindful of the United States’ recent relationship with China, and 
especially China’s systematic human rights violations. China’s conduct makes it more 
likely that China would coerce Applicant through his wife’s family living in China, if China 
determined it was advantageous to do so.     
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in China. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with family members living in China. AG ¶ 8(f) has minimal 
applicability since this mitigating condition can only fully mitigate security concerns 
raised under AG ¶ 7(e), and AG ¶ 7(e) is not raised in this case. 
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationship with his 
spouse and her close relationships with her parents and siblings, who are citizens and 
residents of the PRC and readily available for coercion. The Chinese government’s 
history of espionage (especially industrial espionage) against the United States and its 
failure to follow the rule of law further increase the risk of coercion.   
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
 
11 
 
 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
   
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns in this case. 
Under AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise security concerns.  
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies that he was unwilling or unable 
to satisfy. Thus, AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.   
 
Guideline F also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
For three years, from May 2006 until June 2009, Applicant experienced financial 
hardship resulting from his unstable employment. In May 2006, he was fired from a job, 
 
12 
 
 
and he was unemployed until December 2006. In December 2006, he started his own 
business, which he abandoned in October 2007 when he was unable to make a living 
from the business. In October 2007, he acquired a contract position. In October 2008, 
when the contract expired and the contractor’s business slowed down, Applicant was let 
go. He remained unemployed until acquiring his present position on June 2009. During 
his periods of unemployment, Applicant struggled to pay his debts. 
 
 In about November 2007, Applicant sought help from a debt consolidation 
service and agreed to make payments of $550 a month to satisfy his delinquent debts. 
He made the payments until he became unemployed again. He notified the debt 
consolidation service of his unemployment. When he acquired employment again, he 
notified the debt consolidation service and resumed monthly payments. Applicant 
estimated that he made approximately 18 monthly payments totaling $10,000 through 
the debt consolidation service. (Tr. 39-41.) 
 
 While he was making payments through the debt consolidation service, Applicant 
received notice that another creditor had executed a garnishment order against his 
salary. Applicant tried to negotiate with the creditor, but he was unsuccessful. Applicant 
lacked sufficient income to pay the debt consolidation service and satisfy the 
garnishment. In June 2010, he filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
  
Of the two debts alleged on the SOR, one was erroneously not included in his 
bankruptcy petition. Applicant used contact information provided by the credit bureau in 
an unsuccessful attempt to reach the creditor on the second debt alleged on the SOR. 
When he reported his difficulties in contacting the creditor to the credit bureau, it 
removed the debt from his credit report. 
 
While bankruptcy is a legitimate legal tool in the resolution of debt, it does not 
erase concerns about an individual’s good-faith efforts to satisfy his creditors and his 
current and future financial stability. DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what 
constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim 
the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
13 
 
 
Even though his unemployment was caused in part by conditions beyond his 
control, Applicant behaved responsibly under the circumstances: he set up a payment 
plan with a debt reduction firm, and he adhered to the plan when he was employed. 
When he was laid off, he informed the debt reduction firm, and he resumed payment 
when he acquired new employment. He resorted to bankruptcy only when he was 
unable to satisfy the debt reduction obligation and a garnishment. I conclude that 
Applicant’s actions were responsible and demonstrated a good-faith effort to satisfy his 
delinquent debts. I also note that his current financial status shows he is managing his 
finances responsibly. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) applies in part and that 
AG ¶¶, 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) also apply in mitigation in Applicant’s case.3 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Despite setbacks, Applicant has worked hard to meet his financial obligations. 
Applicant’s wife is attentive and devoted to her parents and sisters, who are citizens and 
residents of the PRC. She is sponsoring one of her sisters for immigration to the United 
States. Her uncle, a citizen and resident of the PRC, is employed by a provincial 
government. Applicant failed to overcome the rebuttable presumption that his wife’s 
close contacts with and ties to her family members in the PRC were also attributable to 
him. He failed to extenuate or mitigate the security concerns raised by his wife’s close 
contacts with her family members who are citizens and residents of China, a country 
                                            
3 AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. Applicant did not contact the credit bureau to 
dispute the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 2.b. Instead, he reported faulty contact information for a creditor and 
requested additional information. 
 
14 
 
 
that poses “an extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy 
of the United States.”   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that while Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline F, he 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline B. 
  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraph  1.a.:          For Applicant 
       Subparagraphs  1.b. - 1.f.:  Against Applicant    
  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs  2.a. - 2.c.:            For Applicant  
 
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
