 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09498 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
  
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Nury Turkel, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen, was born in the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC); he has lived in the United States since 1994. His ethnic identity is Uyghur. 
Applicant’s parents, siblings, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of the PRC in 
the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR). Applicant’s wife, an ethnic Uyghur 
and citizen of the PRC, resides with him in the United States. Applicant failed to rebut or 
mitigate security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                             Statement of the Case 
  
On June 11, 2009, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 3, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 21, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before a DOHA administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 
2011. I convened a hearing on January 9, 2012, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.   
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced two exhibits (Ex. 1 and Ex. 
2), which were entered in the record without objection. The Government offered for 
administrative notice a summary memorandum containing facts about the PRC found in 
15 official U.S. Government documents. The Government also provided for 
administrative notice the 15 source documents from which the facts in the summary 
memorandum were derived. I marked the Government’s summary memorandum and 
accompanying source documents as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did not object to 
my taking notice of the facts about the PRC in the summary memorandum or in the 
source documents. 
 
Applicant testified and called no witnesses. At the hearing, he introduced five 
exhibits, which were identified as Ex. A through Ex. E and entered in the record without 
objection. I left the record open until close of business January 18, 2012, so that 
Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional documents. Applicant timely submitted 
six additional documents, which I marked as Ex. F through Ex. K and entered in the 
record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 17, 
2012. 
                                                    
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations under AG B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.e.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all five allegations. 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record, including Applicant’s testimony, all exhibits, 
all relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the following 
findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and, since April 2009, he has been employed as a 
linguist by a government contractor. Applicant was born and raised in an area of central 
Asia historically identified as Uyghurstan or East Turkistan. Applicant and his family 
members identify themselves ethnically as Uyghur. In 1949, the PRC annexed the 
Uyghur people’s homeland and renamed it the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region 
(XUAR). (Ex. 1; HE 1, Attachment I, Background Note: China; Tr. 52.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 As a teenager growing up in the XUAR, Applicant sought information about his 
Uyghur ethnic heritage. He was later involved with a group that studied and informally 
taught Uyghur culture to others. Neither the group nor its activities had the approval or 
support of the PRC government. (Tr. 77-79.) 
 
 Between 1987 and 1990, Applicant attended an art college in the XUAR, and he 
acquired certification equivalent to an associate’s degree. In 1994, he was selected by 
the PRC government to come to the United States as a folk dancer with a group 
sponsored by the PRC. The dance group performed dances associated with several 
Chinese ethnic groups. (Ex. 1; Tr. 55, 70-71.) 
 
  One day in 1995, while in the United States with the dance group, Applicant 
received a telephone call from an associate who reported that a mutual friend had been 
arrested by the PRC government. The associate told Applicant not to return home 
because, if he were to do so, he would probably also be arrested. Applicant then 
applied for and was granted political asylum.1 In 2006, he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen and acquired a U.S. passport. For a number of years after becoming a U.S. 
citizen, Applicant was active in a Uyghur cultural and political group. The group took 
positions in support of Uyghur culture. Applicant stated that, as a Uyghur, he feels 
antagonistic to the PRC. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 69-70, 75-77, 81-82.) 
 
 Applicant married for the first time in 2002 in the United States. His first wife was 
of Uyghur ethnicity. One child, a daughter, was born to the marriage in 2003. Applicant 
and his first wife divorced in 2007. Applicant’s first wife has become a U.S. citizen, and 
she is aware that he has applied for a security clearance.  (Ex. 1; Ex. 2.) 
 
 In 2008, Applicant married for a second time. His second wife, also of Uyghur 
ethnicity, is a citizen of the PRC and resides with Applicant in the United States. Her 
parents are also citizens and residents of the PRC. (Ex. 1; Tr. 63-64.) 
 
 Applicant’s father and mother are in their 60s and live in the XUAR. They are 
citizens and residents of the PRC. Applicant’s mother, father, and father-in-law are 
retired. His father and father-in-law receive government pensions.  His mother-in-law is 
a homemaker. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2.) 
 
 Applicant has three brothers, all of whom live in the XUAR. The brothers are 
residents and citizens of the PRC. Two of the brothers work in state-sponsored 
construction jobs. The third brother works for a government-owned agricultural 
company. (Ex. 2; Tr. 79-80.)   
 
 Applicant returned four times to visit in the PRC after receiving a U.S. passport. 
In 2006, Applicant took his daughter, who was then about three years old, to visit his 
father and mother in the XUAR.  In 2007, he traveled to the XUAR to visit his parents 
                                            
1 These facts are almost identical to those reported by the applicant in ISCR 07-13393. 
 
 
4 
 
 
and his girlfriend, who is now his wife. In March 2008, Applicant traveled to the XUAR 
for his brother’s wedding. At the same time, Applicant and his second wife were married 
in a small civil ceremony. In October 2008, Applicant returned to the XUAR for a 
ceremony celebrating his marriage in March 2008. The last time he saw his parents, 
brothers, and parents-in-law was in October 2008 at his wedding celebration. (Ex. 2; Tr. 
45-50.) 
 
 When asked why he returned to the PRC for his second wedding, Applicant 
explained that he could not have arranged for the marriage to take place in the United 
States: 
 
I would like to do that, but it’s basically . . . in our tradition, I really cannot 
do that because of [my wife’s] father [and] her mother. I’ve got to do the 
wedding. Then, I can . . . take her . . . back to the States. I really cannot do 
that. That’s against my tradition and also is my father and mother as well. 
So I really cannot do that. (Tr. 49.) 
 
 In the past, Applicant had frequent contact by telephone with his parents and 
siblings in the XUAR. He spoke with his parents by telephone about twice a month. 
Since assuming his position as a contract linguist, however, Applicant has limited his 
telephone contacts with his parents to once a month. He speaks with his brothers on the 
telephone about every two months. Applicant believes that the PRC government 
monitors and records telephone contacts between Uyghurs abroad and their families in 
the XUAR. He speaks with his family in the XUAR less frequently than he did before 
assuming his job as a contract linguist because he does not want his family members to 
be vulnerable to pressure or exploitation from the PRC. (Ex. 2; Tr. 42-45.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant stated that he has no plans to return to the PRC or the 
XUAR. He stated that he would not permit his wife to travel to the PRC and the XUAR to 
visit her parents. He stated that he also understands that his work as a defense 
contractor does not permit him to participate actively in Uyghur cultural and political 
activities in the United States. (Tr. 81, 86-87.)     
 
 Applicant asserted he loved his work as a contract linguist. He stated: “I love [the 
United States] more than anything. I want to give back something for my country.” (Tr. 
40.) 
 
 Applicant provided three certificates of appreciation that he received for his work 
as a contract linguist. In December 2009, he also received a linguist of the month 
award. (Ex. A through Ex. D.) 
 
 In post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided three letters of recommendation 
from military officers with whom he worked during his assignment as a contract linguist. 
One of the letters was provided by the officer in charge of the operation from September 
2010 to July 2011. This officer wrote: 
 
 
5 
 
 
[Applicant’s] performance as a translator at . . . was nothing less than 
stellar! His professional attitude was complemented by his constant 
awareness of his responsibilities to the . . . mission. On numerous 
occasions I personally worked with [Applicant] during potential volatile 
situations. . .  . Utilizing his positive attitude and professional expertise, 
[Applicant] was always key in working through . . . issues without incident. 
. .  .  [Applicant] is a key player behind the successful operation [of our 
mission] and his dedication to the job is a benchmark for other translators 
to follow. (Ex. G.) 
 
 A military physician assigned to the mission praised Applicant’s work ethic, his 
language skills, and his ability to deal with difficult and suspicious individuals. He stated 
that Applicant consistently outperformed his peers and reported that Applicant “was able 
to deescalate several precarious situations given his talents and excellent job 
performance.” (Ex. F.) 
 
 Another medical professional with whom Applicant worked found him to be “very 
skilled and dedicated to his work, and in supporting the United States by providing his 
language and interpreter skills.” This individual also noted that Applicant showed 
“extreme dedication” to his work, often staying late or coming in on weekends when his 
skills and abilities as a translator were needed. (Ex. H.) 
 
 Applicant’s program manager praised Applicant’s professional demeanor and 
noted that he “consistently received superior ratings on the performance objectives 
regarding his command of the English and Uyghur languages.” The program manager 
noted that Applicant had left a well-established job to work as a contract employee 
because he wished to repay his debt to the United States “for welcoming him into the 
country and offering him all the opportunities to succeed.” (Ex. I) 
 
 Applicant provided copies of two performance evaluations he received as a 
contract employee. He received superior ratings for his job skills and work as a linguist. 
His managers considered him to be a strong performer and an asset to his work group. 
(Ex. J; Ex. K.) 
 
 In May 2011, Applicant’s managers made the following recommendations to him 
for improving his performance: 
 
Better understanding of [military base] policies and procedures. 
 
Improve attitude and cooperation with willingness to get along with [c]o-
workers and housemate and/or customer.  
   
Control your feelings and do not let your person[al] life reflect on the job to 
our customer. (Ex. K.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant owns no property in the PRC. He does not have any bank accounts or 
investments in the PRC. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts, which appear in official U.S. 
government documents, and which were summarized in documents provided to 
Applicant and to me: 
 
People’s Republic of China (China or PRC) 
 
China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist 
Party. “[I]n all important government, economic, and cultural institutions in China, party 
committees work to see that party and state policy guidance is followed and that non-
party members do not create autonomous organizations that could challenge party 
rule.” (U.S. Department of State, Background Note: China, dated September 6, 2011, at 
7.) 
 
In its 2009 Annual Report to Congress, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission concluded that “China is the most aggressive country conducting 
espionage against the United States, focusing on obtaining U.S. information and 
technologies beneficial to China’s military modernization and economic development.” 
(U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2009 Report to Congress 
dated November 2009, at 165.) 
 
The U.S. Department of State’s 2010 Human Rights Report: China (includes 
Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau), dated April 8, 2011, provides the following details 
specifying China’s poor human rights record: 
 
arbitrary or unlawful killings by security forces; physical abuse and torture 
of prisoners; arbitrary arrest and detention; denial of fair public trials; 
searches of premises without warrants; monitoring of communication 
(including telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text 
messaging, and Internet communications), opening of domestic and 
international mail, and failure to respect freedom of speech and the press; 
failure to respect academic and artistic freedom; severe restrictions on 
peaceful assembly and restrictions on freedom of association; restrictions 
on the freedom of religion; and [denying]citizens . . . the right to change 
their government peaceably, or change the laws and officials that govern 
them. 
 
The 2010 Human Rights Report also noted that the PRC “continued its severe 
cultural and religious repression of ethnic minorities in the Xinjiang U[y]ghur 
Autonomous egion (XUAR)” and cited the following examples: 
 
Following a riot in Urumqi, XUAR, in July 2009, 197 people died and 1,700 were 
injured. It was also reported by an independent source that in October 2009, hundreds 
of Uyghur men and boys disappeared following the riots. In November 2009, eight 
 
7 
 
 
ethnic Uyghurs and one ethnic Han were executed without due process for crimes 
committed during the riots. In December 2009, 26 persons were sentenced to death for 
their involvement in the violence. All but three of those sentenced to death were 
Uyghurs. Additionally, at least two Uyghur journalists and several Uyghur webmasters 
were tried, convicted, and sentenced for subversive activity in closed-door trials. 
 
                            Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
8 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
 
9 
 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply in this case. Applicant, his spouse, his parents, 
his three brothers, and his wife’s parents were born in the PRC. His parents, brothers, 
and his wife’s parents are citizens and residents of the PRC; they are all ethnic 
Uyghurs; and they all reside in the XUAR. Applicant’s wife is an ethnic Uyghur, a citizen 
of the PRC, and she resides with Applicant in the United States. Applicant and his 
spouse have close connections with family members living in the PRC. Applicant has 
particularly close connections with his parents.    
 
Applicant’s father and father-in-law are retired and received pensions from the 
the PRC government. Applicant’s three brothers work in state-sponsored enterprises. 
 
In 1995, Applicant sought political asylum in the United States after he was 
warned that if he returned to the PRC, he would be subject to arrest. After becoming a 
U.S. citizen in 2006 and acquiring a U.S. passport, Applicant returned four times to the 
PRC and the XUAR to see his family and to arrange and celebrate his second marriage. 
 
 Even though he suspects that his communications with his parents are likely 
monitored and recorded by PRC officials, Applicant telephones them once a month. He 
speaks with his brothers about once every two months. Applicant’s contacts and 
communications with his family demonstrate his ties of affection with his family 
members. His relationship with his parents and his brothers and his wife’s relationship 
with her parents are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” These relationships with residents of 
the PRC who are also members of a persecuted ethnic group create a potential conflict 
of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [his] desire to help” family members who are in the PRC. For example, if the 
Chinese government wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on 
his parents or his brothers. Applicant is also subject to potential coercion through his 
spouse and her relationship with her parents.2 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
                                            
2 Applicant’s continuing close contacts with his family members and their reliance upon PRC government 
benefits distinguish this case from the facts recited in ISCR 07-13393, which also considered the security 
eligibility of a Uyghur linguist. In ISCR 07-13393, the applicant had not returned to the PRC after receiving 
asylum and U.S. citizenship. The facts in ISCR 07-13393 suggest that none of the applicant’s foreign 
relatives was employed by PRC government enterprises or received pension benefits from that 
government. Additionally, the applicant in ISCR 07-13393 reported that, while he generally spoke on the 
telephone with his parents every three or four months, he had not spoken with them for six months. He 
also reported that he had not spoken with two of his brothers and his sister for three years, and he had 
not spoken with three of his brothers for 14 years.  See ISCR 07-13393 (September 9, 2008).  
 
10 
 
 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government and a weak and oppressive human rights record. Moreover, the risk 
increases when a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
or if the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of the PRC with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in the PRC, and his spouse’s relationships with her family 
members living in the PRC, do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed 
in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and a desire to assist his parents living in the PRC or to assist his spouse, who might be 
coerced through a family member living in the PRC.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from the PRC seek or 
have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his spouse, 
or their family members living in the PRC, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility 
in the future. Applicant’s continuing relationships with family members create a potential 
conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security 
concern about his desire to assist his spouse or their family members living in the PRC, 
in the event they should be pressured or coerced by agents of the Chinese government 
or intelligence services for sensitive or classified information. The record contains 
substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his parents and his brothers, as well as 
his spouse’s relationship with her parents living in the PRC, thereby raising the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
11 
 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to the PRC in 
2006, 2007, and twice in 2008. Applicant has regular contact with his parents and 
brothers, all of whom reside in the PRC. His spouse, a resident of the PRC, resides with 
Applicant and she, too has parents in the PRC. Because of his connections to the PRC,  
Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
and his spouse’s relationships with relatives who are PRC citizens] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.”    
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has served as 
a contract linguist with the U.S. military, and he feels a strong appreciation for his U.S. 
citizenship.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family members in the 
PRC. He communicates with his parents and his brothers, even though he knows his 
telephone calls to them are probably monitored by PRC officials. There is no evidence, 
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Chinese government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in the PRC to coerce 
Applicant or his family for classified or sensitive information. However, because 
Applicant is a member of a persecuted ethnic minority in the PRC, there is an increased 
possibility that Applicant or Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as targets 
for improper coercion or exploitation. While the Government does not have any burden 
to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence were present, 
Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ recent 
relationship with the PRC, and especially the PRC’s systematic human rights violations. 
The PRC’s past conduct makes it more likely that the PRC would coerce Applicant 
through his family living in the PRC and XUAR, if the PRC determined it was 
advantageous to do so.     
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in the PRC. Applicant is not required 
to report his contacts with family members living in the PRC. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has minimal applicability. Applicant has no property or financial 
interests in the PRC. The record does not include the value of Applicant’s assets or 
property interest in the United States. However, this mitigating condition can only fully 
 
12 
 
 
mitigate security concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e), and AG ¶ 7(e) is not raised in this 
case. 
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationship with family 
members in the PRC. These individuals live in the PRC and are readily available for 
coercion. The Chinese government’s history of espionage (especially industrial 
espionage) against the United States and its failure to follow the rule of law further 
increase the risk of coercion.  
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. As a 
Uyghur linguist, Applicant has rendered an important service to his adopted country. He 
is a talented, honorable, and hard-working U.S. citizen. He is considered to be a valued 
employee. He sought to use his experience, skills, and knowledge to serve his adopted 
country, and he sought a security clearance as a government contractor. 
 
Applicant is attentive and devoted to his mother, father, and brothers who are 
citizens and residents of the PRC. He is an admirable family member. However, he 
failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his contacts and relationships with his 
wife, parents, brothers, and parents-in-law, who are citizens the PRC, a country that 
 
13 
 
 
poses “an extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of 
the United States.”   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e.:             Against  Applicant 
  
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
