 
1 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-02148 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Phillip Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: (Name Redacted), Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a r eview of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns related to foreign preference and foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). This action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and t he 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, notarized on November 2, 2011, Applicant admitted all 
the factual allegations under Guidelines B and C, except for allegation 1.c under 
Guideline B. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 12, 2011, and 
 
2 
 
 
the case was assigned to me on January 12, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
February 1, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 15, 2012.1
 
 The 
Government offered three exhibits, which I admitted into evidence as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, 
and offered two exhibits, admitted into evidence as Applicant's Exhibits (AE) A and B. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 24, 2012. 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I took administrative notice of facts related to Iran, included in 15 U.S. 
Government documents provided by Department Counsel. The facts are limited to 
matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute, and are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 59 years old, was born in Iran. He came to the United States in 1977, 
and completed a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering at a U.S. university in 1980. 
He returned to Iran, and then moved to Canada, where he earned a master’s degree. He 
holds Canadian citizenship. He moved to the United States in 1995. Once he was 
established in a job, he moved his wife and children from Canada to the United States in 
1996. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. Applicant has worked as a software 
engineer for the same federal contractor since 1995. (GE 1; Tr. 16, 26, 30, 43-44, 47-48)  
 
Applicant's wife was born in Iran. They married in 1976. She holds Canadian, 
Iranian, and U.S. citizenship. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. She earned 
a nursing degree in Canada, and a master’s degree at a U.S. university. She works for a 
federal agency as a nursing educator. Applicant and his wife do not  maintain a 
relationship with the few aunts and uncles who remain in Iran. His wife last traveled to 
Iran when Applicant's mother was dying in 2006. Most of her distant family lives in 
England and the United States. Her mother is a c itizen of Iran and Canada. She is a 
retired librarian and lives in Canada. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 29, 31, 38, 46-47, 49-50) 
 
Applicant and his wife have two adult daughters. The older daughter was born in 
Iran. She lived there for three years, and then moved to Canada, where she grew up. 
She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. She also holds Canadian citizenship. 
She attended a U.S. university and law school, and currently works as an attorney for a 
U.S. firm. Since leaving Iran as a child, she has visited three times, the most recent in 
2006, to see her dying grandmother. She speaks to her uncle in Iran once a year, or 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel informed Applicant of the hearing date by telephone on January 24, 2012. 
Applicant had sufficient notice of the date under the Directive, ¶E3.1.8. (Tr. 12) 
 
3 
 
 
less. (Tr. 27, 40) Applicant's younger daughter was born in Canada and also currently 
holds Canadian, Iranian, and U.S. citizenship. She attends a U.S. college. (GE 1; Tr. 26) 
 
 One of Applicant’s brothers is a c itizen and r esident of Iran. He owned a c opy 
shop, and was married with one child. The son developed a rare genetic disease, and 
passed away at the age of seven. Since then, Applicant's brother has been in a 
depressed state. He no longer owns the shop, and is unemployed. He and his wife 
divorced after his son died. He lives alone, and his ex-wife and daughter have moved to 
Canada. Applicant speaks with this brother three to five times per year, on hol idays. 
Applicant most recently saw his brother in Iran when he visited in 2006 to see his dying 
mother. His brother has no c onnection with the Iranian government. Applicant has no 
plans to return to Iran, and surrendered his Iranian passport two years ago to his FSO. 
(Tr. 27, 28, 45, 46) Applicant's other brother is a citizen of Iran and Canada. He lives in 
the United States and is a student at a U.S. university. Applicant talks with this brother 
occasionally by telephone, and the brother visited Applicant on a holiday in November 
2011. (GE 1, 3; Tr. 29, 45)  
 
Applicant held a Canadian passport, but it expired, and he did not renew it 
because, he testified, he always uses his U.S. passport. He has no intention to return to 
Canada. (Tr. 46, 60-61) Applicant also held an Iranian passport. He used his U.S. 
passport for all other foreign travel. He was unaware that using a f oreign passport 
represented a security risk. (GE 1; Tr. 60-61) 
 
During his security interview in 2009, Applicant stated he is willing to renounce his 
Iranian citizenship. Applicant possessed an Iranian passport, which will expire in July 
2012. He surrendered it to his current FSO approximately two years ago. At the time, the 
FSO told Applicant that surrendering the passport was equivalent to renouncing his 
Iranian citizenship. (GE 2; Tr. 54-56) 
 
ADMIN. JUDGE O'BRIEN:  So you thought that handing in your passport 
to her [FSO] was, in fact, renouncing your citizenship?  
 
THE WITNESS:  Right. 
 
ADMIN. JUDGE O'BRIEN:  And you went ahead and handed in your 
passport?  
 
 THE WITNESS:  Yes. 
 
Applicant voted in the 2009 Iranian presidential election. He opposes the current 
regime in Iran, and in 2009, he thought the opposition candidate had a chance to be 
elected. He voted at a local polling station to support the opposition, as a way to institute 
change, and to encourage democracy and to improve relations with the United States. 
He votes in U.S. elections. (Tr. 32-33, 41, 50-51) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has no property, bank accounts, investment accounts, or other financial 
ties to Iran or Canada. His three 401(k) accounts with a U.S. investment company are 
worth approximately $1,000,000. His wife has a federal government Thrift Savings Plan 
(TSP), with a balance of approximately $200,000. He owns two houses in the United 
States. He bought his first house in 2001, and he maintains it as a rental property. He 
purchased a second house in 2003, where he currently lives. He estimates the value of 
his current home at $700,000. He is about to build two new houses to replace his current 
home. (GE 2, 3; AE A, B; Tr. 35, 43, 57-60) 
 
Applicant has worked on military contracts since 1995, in support of U.S. forces. 
Before the Iraq war, he traveled to assignments at U.S. military bases in Qatar and 
Kuwait. Since the war began, he has  traveled to the Netherlands and Kuwait multiple 
times in support of arms and materiel shipments for the war. His projects primarily 
involved software engineering, as well as transfer of military equipment from U.S. ships. 
(Tr. 44-49)  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Iran is a c onstitutional, theocratic, Islamic republic, founded in 1979 a fter a 
revolution that removed the Shah as head of state. Islamic law is the basis for the 
authority of the Iranian state. Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the country’s political 
structure, and ultimate political power rests in a Shi’a religious scholar, who is called the 
Supreme Leader.  
 
The United States has not had diplomatic or consular relations with Iran since 
1979. In 2010, the President declared the continuation of a 1979 declaration of a 
National Emergency with Respect to Iran in order “to deal with the unusual and 
extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United 
States constituted by the situation in Iran.”  
 
 Iran engages in clandestine efforts to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and 
other sensitive technology, and to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD). A U.S. government assessment as of February 2011 noted that Iran 
has the scientific, technical, and industrial ability to eventually produce nuclear 
weapons. Additionally, Iran sponsors international terrorism, intervenes in the internal 
affairs of Iraq and Afghanistan, undermines the Middle East peace process, and violates 
the human rights of the Iranian people. 
 
Iran has been designated as a state sponsor of terrorism since 1984, and 
remains one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism. According to the U.S. 
Department of State, it provides planning and financial support for terrorist attacks 
throughout the Middle East, Europe, and Central Asia. Iran trains, equips, and funds 
select Iraqi Sh’ia militant groups. It has refused to bring to justice senior al-Qa’ida 
members it has detained. The United States is concerned about the possibility that 
terrorists could eventually obtain WMD from Iran.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S.-Iranian dual citizens to consider carefully 
the risks of travel to Iran. Iranian authorities do not  recognize dual citizenship, and 
consider Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens and their children to be solely Iranian 
citizens. The State Department also warns that U.S. citizens of Iranian origin may be 
subject to harassment or arrest while in Iran, and should carefully consider the risk of 
being targeted by Iranian authorities. Such dual citizens have had their U.S. passports 
confiscated, and have been denied permission to exit Iran. Visitors from abroad may be 
placed under surveillance, have their personal possessions in hotel rooms searched, 
and their telephones monitored. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on ex amination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2
 
 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and C. 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4
                                                          
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on t rust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the 
national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
6 
 
 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access in favor of the Government.5
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern under Guideline C, AG ¶ 9, states: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or  she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U .S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
  (7) Voting in a foreign election. 
 
In 2009, Applicant voted in the Iranian presidential election. He testified that he 
opposes the current regime, and believed that voting would assist in the election of the 
opposition candidate. AG ¶ 10(a)(7) applies. None of the mitigating conditions listed 
under AG ¶ 11 specifically apply to disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a)(7). However, the 
Concern under Guideline C is that an individual who engages in certain activities, such 
as voting in foreign elections, may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States. Here, Applicant’s history and 
conduct show that he is unlikely to make decisions that would harm the United States. 
On the contrary, he has spent 17 years assisting the Department of Defense in its 
efforts overseas. Applicant‘s voting did not express a preference for Iran, but showed 
his opposition to the current regime. He voted in 2009 to support the opposition 
because he thought the opposition candidate had a chance to be elected. Applicant has 
voted in U.S. elections.  
 
Mitigating condition AG 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to 
renounce dual citizenship) also applies. Applicant expressed his willingness to renounce 
his Iranian citizenship to the security agent at his 2009 security interview, and 
surrendered his foreign passport more than two years ago. At the time, he was informed 
by the FSO that this act would constitute a renunciation of his Iranian citizenship. He 
surrendered it with that belief demonstrating his preference for the United States over 
Iran.  
 
                                                          
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a s ecurity concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and f ind that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a per son or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns about several of Applicant's family members 
including his brother who is an Iranian citizen living in Iran; and Applicant's wife, brother, 
and mother-in-law. Other than his brother, none of these relatives live in Iran, but they 
hold multiple citizenships, including Iranian. 
 
 Family ties with a resident or citizen of a f oreign country do not automatically 
disqualify an applicant from obtaining a security clearance; such ties are only 
disqualifying if they create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or a potential conflict 
of interest. The country in question must be considered.6
 
 Iran and the United States 
have had a hostile relationship. It has been designated a state sponsor of terrorism. The 
State Department warns that dual U.S-Iranian citizens who travel to Iran must exercise 
particular vigilance during travel. Such dual citizens have had their U.S. passports 
confiscated, and have been denied permission to exit Iran.  
 Here, Applicant shares living quarters with his wife, who is a c itizen of Iran, 
Canada, and the United States. His brother is a c itizen and resident of Iran. He is in 
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (Ap. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
8 
 
 
touch with his brother in Iran three to five times per year. He has not traveled to Iran 
since 2006, when his mother passed away. Applicant's family ties with Iran create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) apply. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
The primary family connection to Iran is Applicant's brother. However, he does 
not have a close relationship with his brother. They talk three to five times per year on 
holidays. He has not visited Iran since 2006, and he surrendered his Iranian passport to 
his FSO two years ago. He has no bank accounts, property, or any other financial 
interests in Iran that could be used to manipulate or pressure him. On the other hand, 
his connections with the United States include his U.S. citizenship, U.S. undergraduate 
education, his long-term residence here, two real estate properties, substantial 
investments in 401(k) accounts and a TSP, and his long service to the U.S. military 
through his employment with a federal contractor. Given these connections, it is unlikely 
that Applicant would choose his foreign sibling if a conflict of interest arose. Mitigating 
conditions AG ¶ 8(a) and (b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and r ecency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a s ecurity 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Guideline B cases do not focus on an applicant's loyalty to the United States, and 
here, Applicant’s loyalty in not in question. His ties to Iran consist of one brother there, 
and three relatives in the United States and Canada who have multiple citizenships with 
Iran, Canada, and the United States. Applicant has, at most, sparse contact with his 
brother in Iran. He has not traveled there in more than five years, has no plans to return 
in the future, and has surrendered his Iranian passport. He does not own property or 
have financial interests there. He votes in U.S. elections, and his one instance of voting 
in an Iranian election was in the hope of ending the current regime.  
 
I have also considered Applicant's strong ties to the United States. He has made 
his life here for the past 17 years. He earned a bachelor’s degree at a U.S. university. 
He worked steadily during his entire time in the United States to support the U.S. 
military. Given his substantial financial resources, it is unlikely he would be vulnerable to 
financial coercion. His wife is a U.S. citizen. She has earned a graduate degree here, 
and has been a federal government employee for years. Finally, Applicant has 
demonstrated his dedication to the United States through his contributions to U.S. 
military efforts both before and during the Iraq war, over the past 17 years. Given these 
U.S. ties, I conclude that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has satisfied the doubts raised 
under the guidelines for foreign influence and foreign preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a  – 1.d  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 1.a   For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a s ecurity 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
