 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-08778 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 30, 2010, Applicant submitted her electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On August 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 31, 2011. She answered 
the SOR in writing on October 13, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on October 17, 2011. I received the 
case assignment on November 22, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 23, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 8, 2011. 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were received without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through K, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 19, 2011. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b to 1.k, 1.l, 1.m to 1.u, 1.v, 1.z, 1.aa, 1.cc, 1.dd, 1.gg, 1.ii, and, 1.kk to 1.ll of the 
SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.w, 1.x, 1.y, 1.bb, 
1.ee, 1.ff, 1.hh, and 1.jj of the SOR. She also provided additional information to support 
her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 53 years old, married, and has two children. She has a master’s 
degree in computer science. Her husband is retired. One daughter is in high school and 
the other daughter has four children and works low-paying jobs. Applicant helps that 
daughter financially, including giving the daughter her car to drive while Applicant rides 
the bus to and from work every day. (Tr. 60, 61, 126; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has 36 delinquent debts listed in the SOR (Subparagraphs 1.a to 1. jj). 
Two of the alleged delinquent debts are duplicates (Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.cc for $29 
owed on a medical account) making the actual number of delinquent debts 35. These 
debts total $12,655. Three of the listed debts are loan payments due on three loans 
(Subparagraphs 1.v, 1.w, and 1.x). The total balance of these three loans is $66,006. 
Applicant used two student loans to obtain her master’s degree in 2004. Applicant 
stated she was paying her student loans. Two additional allegations pertain to 
Applicant’s filing of a Chapter 13 bankruptcy action in January 2003 that was converted 
to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy and discharged in February 2006 (Subparagraph 1.kk), and 
Applicant’s first bankruptcy filing of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 1994 that was 
discharged in July 1994 (Subparagraph 1.ll). (Tr. 11-59, 118; Exhibits 1-6, A-C),  
 
 In September 2011 Applicant sought professional debt assistance from a debt 
management company. She hired this company to pay her debts with the money she 
sends them each month. Applicant pays the company $900 monthly through a bank 
electronic deduction to resolve her delinquent debts, all of which are listed in the SOR. 
She has not enrolled 10 debts totaling $2,104 in the repayment plan (Subparagraphs 
1.e, 1.f, 1.p, 1.t. 1u, 1.bb, 1.ee, 1.ff, 1.hh, and 1.jj). These debts she has not been able 
to identify, denies she owes them, or forgot to include them in the repayment plan. Any 
debts she owes will be placed in the repayment plan, when she is certain she owes 
them. Applicant paid one delinquent debt for $342 owed to a payday lender 
(Subparagraph 1.y). Applicant stated she would put into the repayment plan any debt 
that should be paid. The repayment plan is scheduled to continue for the next 16 
months. Applicant included in the debt repayment plan one debt not alleged in the SOR. 
The debt repayment document from the company shows a total balance of debts in the 
amount of $10,747. (Tr. 11-59; Exhibits 1-6, A-C) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s 35 delinquent debts listed in the SOR include 19 medical accounts 
(Subparagraphs 1.b-1.k, 1.m-1.u, 1.cc). These debts total $2,587. (Tr. 11-59; Exhibits 1-
6, A-C) 
 
 Applicant completed her e-QIP on April 30, 2010. She answered Section 15 
“Military History” in Question 15 (a) with a, “No,” concerning her service in the U.S. 
military. She denied in Question 15 (c) that she ever received a discharge that was not 
honorable. In fact, Applicant served in the U.S. Army for 10 years of active duty and is 
now a retired Army reservist. She had a top secret clearance while on active duty. 
Applicant acted as a security clearance investigator during parts of her Army career. 
Applicant could not explain how she answered Question 15 (a) incorrectly. Section 15 
was not an allegation in the SOR but rather shows Applicant answered a question 
incorrectly that was inconsistent with her history and other answers in the same section 
of the e-QIP. (Tr. 65-69; Exhibit 1) 
 
The SOR alleged Applicant also answered the Section 26 (a) question about 
ever filing bankruptcy in the past seven years with a “no,” which is true as to the filing 
date in 2003 but not regarding the bankruptcy discharge date in 2006. The SOR alleges 
Applicant did not answer Section 26 (g) correctly when she denied ever having bills 
turned over to a collection agency, Section 26 (m) as to whether she was over 180 days 
delinquent in the past seven years on any debt, and Section 26 (n) whether she was 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt. Applicant claimed she made a mistake in 
answering those questions as she did. When she answered Section 26 on the security 
clearance application, she thought she was paying on every debt she owed. Applicant 
testified she knew all debts were on her credit record, so she would not have gained 
anything by falsely answering Section 26. Applicant stated she was not certain that she 
owed some of her debts as alleged when she completed the application. She described 
herself as “stupid” about her finances twice in testimony addressing the falsification 
issue. (Tr. 59, 66, 75, 97-111; Exhibit 1) 
 
  Applicant denies having any credit cards. She does not have a savings account. 
Applicant has a checking account in which she currently has $100. Applicant and her 
husband have a monthly net income from her salary and his pensions plus social 
security payments of $7,000. Their monthly expenses total $5,649. Of the net remainder 
amount, Applicant pays the debt management company $900, leaving her with $200 per 
pay period for discretionary spending. Applicant spent $2,000 last year purchasing new 
furniture and a television set from a store that extends credit to persons who have poor 
credit histories. Applicant and her husband drive cars that were used when they 
purchased them. As stated, Applicant loans her car to her oldest daughter for the 
daughter’s daily use because of the daughter’s poor financial status caused by 
minimum wage jobs held by herself and her husband with which they support four 
children. Applicant has never had any financial counseling. (Tr. 89-127) 
 
Applicant also stated that she was living paycheck to paycheck, was 
overwhelmed and confused by her debts, suffered “hard years” financially, and did not 
have extra money to pay her debts during those years. Applicant admitted her financial 
 
4 
 
problems have occurred for the past several years. Her earliest delinquent debts on the 
credit reports submitted are dated 2006. Applicant refinanced her mortgage a few years 
ago and took some money from that transaction with which she paid some bills, but she 
could not remember which bills she paid. Applicant repeatedly demonstrated a lack of 
understanding about the origin and current status of her delinquent debts. She 
borrowed money from pay day loan companies and has about $1,500 remaining to pay. 
(Tr. 11-59, 79, 80, 84, 97-110, 127, 136; Exhibits 2-4) 
 
 Applicant submitted seven character letters from a supervisor and co-workers, in 
addition to persons with whom she works on government projects. They attest to 
Applicant’s hard work, integrity, honesty, and dedication to her work goals. The letter 
writers also state Applicant produces a quality work product. (Exhibits E-K) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG  18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Four conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by  
     excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to- 
     income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
            
Applicant filed two bankruptcy petitions in 1994 and 2003. She received Chapter 
7 bankruptcy discharges in 1994 and 2006 as a result of those filings. After her latest 
bankruptcy discharge Applicant incurred delinquent debts, accumulating $12,655 in 
delinquent debt from 2006 to the present time that was unpaid. She did not begin to 
 
6 
 
address the payments of those debts until September 2011. Applicant has 35 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply.  
 
Applicant in each of the past two decades and now this decade spent money 
irresponsibly and beyond her financial means to repay the debts incurred. She has 
excessive indebtedness consistently. Applicant used the federal bankruptcy law to 
resolve her previous two episodes of excessive indebtedness. Now she is using a debt 
repayment company to pay her latest accumulation of delinquent debt. AG ¶ 19 (b) and 
(e) apply to these facts.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. One condition may be applicable:   
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant admitted repeatedly during the hearing she was overwhelmed with her 
debts and could not develop any plan herself to pay them. In 2011 she hired a debt 
management firm to use the $900 monthly she pays it to repay the delinquent debts in 
an orderly manner.  
 
All debts in the SOR are included in the plan except for 10 debts totaling $2,104, 
which she is not paying at the present. Applicant has $10,551 of the SOR alleged debts 
in the repayment plan. She has paid one debt for $342. She is making payments herself 
on her student loans. Applicant uses an automatic deduction from her bank account to 
pay the debt management company.  
 
Applicant ignored her delinquent debts because she did not understand the 
extent of them and was not able to formulate a plan herself to repay them. She was 
unable to control her spending and structure regular plans to repay them in a timely 
manner. Applicant admitted she was overwhelmed by her financial situation and 
confused as to the best course of action to take to resolve the debts. She has a history 
of using the federal bankruptcy court twice to repay her debts. Finally, Applicant decided 
to use a debt management company to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant is making an effort to rid herself of this financial burden. and  achieve 
financial stability. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith 
efforts to repay her delinquent debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition may apply: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not list her delinquent debts in answer to Section 26 of the e-QIP 
that she completed on August 5, 2010. Applicant answered as follows: Section 26 (g) 
that she did not have any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency in the past 
seven years; Section 26 (m) that she has not been delinquent over 180 days on any 
debt in the past seven years; and, Section 26 (n) that she was not currently over 90 
days delinquent on any debt. In fact, Applicant’s financial history was such that all these 
answers should have been in the affirmative.  
 
However, Applicant’s incorrect answers to Section 26, when coupled with her 
answer to Section 15 about her military service, demonstrate she marked the answers 
without thinking and without specific knowledge of her debt status. Applicant filed 
bankruptcy twice to rid herself of delinquent debts because she could not think of how to 
resolve them except through that process. Applicant’s testimony and demeanor at the 
hearing show she was confused when she completed the e-QIP. It is obvious from the 
totality of the information in the record and documents submitted that Applicant had no 
intention to deliberately falsify any answer to Section 26 questions about her finances, 
but was unaware of the extent of the delinquent debts. Realizing she needed help to 
resolve her debts, she contracted with a debt management company to establish a 
repayment plan. On the basis of this information, there was no deliberate falsification of 
financial information, but rather a negligent series of answers to Section 26.  
  
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The 
absence of a deliberate falsification makes it unnecessary to apply any of the mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of being unable 
to control her spending, resulting in the necessity that she has sought three times to 
resolve the debts by means other than her own initiative. Two such efforts were through 
the bankruptcy courts so the creditors did not get paid. Applicant was an educated adult 
at all the relevant times she incurred these delinquent debts. Applicant anticipates that 
her financial situation will improve as the debts are paid. She earns sufficient funds to 
pay her debts and save money. Her supervisor and co-workers, who wrote her 
character letters, know of Applicant’s financial condition, so there is no potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. In addition, the work of the debt 
management company shows she is not hiding her financial situation. The likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence is slight because of the commitment Applicant has 
demonstrated for resolving her debts and preventing similar problems from occurring in 
the future. Applicant appeared sincere and contrite about her past conduct and serious 
about changing her financial situation.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations and personal conduct security concerns. I conclude the “whole-person” 
concept for Applicant. 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a to 1.ll:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
