1
KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline D
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings were supported by substantial record evidence. 
Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 10-08550.a1
DATE: 03/20/2012
DATE: March 20, 2012
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-08550
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Janiffer Pearce, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 20, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline
D (Sexual Behavior) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 28, 2011, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1This letter was admitted into evidence as Government Exhibit (GE) 3.
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in some of her
findings of fact; whether the Judge erred in her credibility determination regarding Applicant’s
testimony; whether the Judge failed to consider, or mis-weighed, record evidence favorable to
Applicant; whether the Judge’s application of the mitigating conditions was erroneous; and whether
the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the
Judge’s decision.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an employee of a
Defense contractor, with a degree from a prestigious U.S. university.  He has held a security
clearance since 2001.  Additionally, he was granted a program access clearance in 2008.  
In 2009, Applicant underwent polygraph testing in connection with his program access
clearance.  He submitted to three polygraph tests in all because, he stated, the polygraphers “needed
to check on certain answers.”  Decision at 2.  During one of the interviews, Applicant admitted to
having viewed pornography.  He was further questioned as to whether the pornography included
images of minors.
Later that year, Applicant received a letter stating that his program access had been revoked.1
The basis for the revocation was Applicant’s admission of having downloaded and viewed child
pornography–seven videos of females under 18 engaging in sexual activity with adult males and five
photographs of females under 18 engaging in sexual activity with adult males.  The letter stated that
Applicant had watched each video once and then deleted them from his home computer.  It stated
that he had saved the photographs on his home computer for a day or two before deleting them.  This
activity occurred from the late 1990s to the mid- to-late-2000s.  
At the hearing, Applicant testified that GE 3 took his answers out of context.  He testified
that he had advised polygraphers that he did not know for certain that the women depicted in the
videos and photographs were 18 or older.  One of his exhibits displayed disclaimers from websites
he had visited, stating that all models were 18 years or older.  However, the disclaimers were
obtained a week before the hearing.  There was no evidence as to the content of any disclaimers
during the times Applicant actually visited the adult websites.    
 In 2010, Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA).  Section 25 of the
SCA asked if he had “EVER had a clearance or access authorization denied, suspended, or
revoked[.]” Decision at 3.  Applicant answered “no” to this question.  He testified that he had
originally answered “yes,” but had changed his answer upon the advice of his facility security officer
(FSO).  
Applicant’s wife, mother-in-law, and several co-workers provided letters of support.  These
letters commend Applicant for his honesty and moral probity.  The Judge stated that it was not clear
if each of the writers knew about the specific allegations.
2This Affidavit was admitted as GE 2.
3
In the Analysis, the Judge noted differences between Applicant’s statements as reflected in
GE 3 and those he made subsequently, including his hearing testimony.  She concluded that his
hearing testimony was not credible.  She noted the specificity of his answers to the polygraph
interviews contained in GE 3, as well as his statement in the Affidavit he signed in connection with
his 2010 SCA, that he promised “to never look at or download any child porno again.”2  Decision
at 6, Judge’s emphasis.  She also referred to her finding that the website disclaimers did not relate
to the times Applicant had accessed pornography.  Rejecting Applicant’s denials, the Judge stated
that he had downloaded videos and photographs of underage females engaging in sexual behavior
and that this was not an isolated incident but, rather, occurred over several years.  She stated that,
moreover, he had failed to disclose the revocation of his access clearance in his SCA.  She further
stated that Applicant had not acknowledged his  misconduct, which made it difficult to conclude that
it will not recur.      
Applicant’s brief challenges the Judge’s findings that Applicant had knowingly downloaded
and viewed child pornography and that he had deliberately falsified his SCA.  We review a Judge’s
findings of fact to determine if they are based upon “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same
record.”  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
We have considered Applicant’s arguments in light of the record, viewed as a whole.  The
challenged finding regarding child pornography is supported by the evidence. GE 3 is a Decision
Statement, which is a document generally admissible in DOHA proceedings.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 07-18324 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2011).  The Judge described this document as detailed and
credible, a characterization that is reasonable and consistent with the totality of the record evidence.
Concerning the falsification, the Judge did not specifically state that Applicant’s omission
to the SCA was deliberate; however, that was the clear implication of her findings on this matter.
Given Applicant’s high level of education, the clarity of the question at issue here, and the absence
of evidence corroborating Applicant’s claim to have been acting on the advice of his FSO, the
Judge’s findings concerning the omission are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-08023 at 3
(App. Bd. Sep. 6, 2011) (In analyzing whether an omission is deliberate, a Judge must examine the
omission in light of the entire record).  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s credibility determination.  However, her analysis of
Applicant’s inconsistent statements and the absence of significant corroborating evidence support
her conclusion as to Applicant’s credibility.  
Applicant contends that the Judge ignored evidence favorable to him, such as his testimony
that (1) he never intentionally downloaded child pornography; (2) he did not believe his signing the
3Applicant’s testimony concerning GE 2 implied that he had understood the Affidavit merely to be repeating
allegations contained in GE 3.  See, e.g., Tr. at 46: “Q: It says you admitted to downloading child pornography, including
seven videos of girls under the age of 18.  A: I don’t know if that came out of the Statement of Reasons from December
of 2009.”  See also Tr. at 81: The Affidavit “was rehashing the summary of what was alleged” in GE 3.  His assertion
in his Appeal Brief that he did not understand his signature to be an admission, but, rather, simply an acknowledgment
of the allegations against him, is based upon his hearing testimony.  However, GE 2 contains statements by Applicant
which can reasonably be interpreted as admissions of wrongdoing.  For example, Applicant promised “never to access
any of these porno web sites or download any picturers of . . . .girls under the age of 18.”  He stated elsewhere in GE
2  that “I have learned my lesson and promise to never look at or download any child porno again.”  He also stated that
he “did not believe that the special programs security office or the customer would communicate with the DoD” on this
matter.  The following appears immediately above Applicant’s signature:   “This document is true and complete to the
best of my knowledge and belief and is made of my own free will, without any threat, promise of immunity, or
inducement.  I understand that the information which I have given . . . may be shown to, or discussed with, the interested
parties.”     
4
Affidavit (GE 2) constituted an admission of the contents therein;3 (3) his FSO had advised him to
answer “no” to the pertinent question on the SCA; and (4) the websites contained the disclaimers
reflected in his documentary evidence.  
A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 10-10068 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2011).  A Judge is not required to discuss every piece
of record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07597 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2011).  In this case,
the Judge actually made extensive findings on most of the issues which Applicant has cited and drew
sustainable conclusions from them in the Analysis portion of the Decision.  She did not explicitly
address his claim that GE 2 was not an admission of wrongdoing.  However, she treated GE 2 as
containing such admissions, which is sustainable in light of the record as a whole.  Her treatment
of this exhibit does not support Applicant’s argument that she failed to consider his testimony.
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence, nor
has he demonstrated that she weighed his evidence in an arbitrary and capricious manner.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-11345 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010).  That the Judge did not find much of
Applicant’s evidence credible does not mean that she failed to consider the evidence or that she mis-
weighed it.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made,’” both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
5
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
