 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08992 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 15, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. His wife is a citizen 
of Ukraine and she has several family members in both Ukraine and Russia. Applicant 
mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
because his ties to the U.S. are strong and he has little contact with his foreign relatives. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On October 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 29, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 16, 
2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 6, 2012. I convened the hearing via 
 
2 
 
 
video teleconference with the Applicant’s location abroad as scheduled on January 24, 
2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 to 5. Applicant did not object to GE 1 to 
4 and they were admitted. Applicant objected to GE 5, but it was admitted over the 
Applicant’s objection. (Tr. 22.) The Government requested administrative notice be 
taken of certain facts relating to Russia as contained in Hearing Exhibits (HE) I.1 
Applicant had no objection and I took administrative notice of the documents. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 6, 
2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 DOHA alleged under Guideline B, Foreign Influence: that Applicant’s wife is a 
citizen of the Ukraine, she owns an apartment in Ukraine, and she stands to inherit a 
second apartment (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.); that Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are 
citizens of Russia residing in Ukraine (SOR ¶ 1.b. and 1.c.); that Applicant’s aunt is a 
citizen and resident in Russia (SOR ¶ 1.d.); that Applicant’s wife has two uncles who are 
citizens and residents of Russia and that one uncle works for a state research and 
production space center in Russia (SOR ¶ 1.e.); that Applicant’s wife’s cousin and her 
husband are citizens and residents of Russia (SOR ¶ 1.f.); and that Applicant and his 
wife visit relatives in Ukraine and Russia every other year (SOR ¶ 1.f.). Applicant 
admitted the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in the 
United States and is solely a U.S. citizen. He is the son of a retired sergeant major in 
the Army who is buried in Arlington National Cemetery. His father served in the Army for 
over 21 years. Applicant served in the Air Force for approximately four years, but 
separated early with a General Under Honorable Conditions discharge. Applicant has 
worked abroad as a defense contractor for the past 14 years. He has had no 
disciplinary write-ups or violations during his tenure with the government contractor. All 
of his banking accounts are in the United States. He owns a home in the United States, 
in which his mother resides. He has two siblings that reside in the United States. 
Applicant travels to the United States every other year to visit his family there. (GE 1; Tr. 
31-39.)  
 
Applicant has been married to a Ukrainian citizen for the past nine years. He met 
his wife in September 2002, when he answered an email for an on-line dating service. 
The dating scene at his overseas-duty station was very limited and he sought to expand 
his prospects. Through the dating service, he was introduced to his wife. His wife 
worked as a secretary at a paper mill. Applicant and his wife corresponded through 
email in English for a couple of months. Eventually, they began talking on the phone on 
the weekends, as well as writing to each other. Six-to-eight months after they started 
corresponding, they decided to meet in Germany. The trip was a month long vacation 
from the Applicant’s duty station. Shortly after their meeting, they decided to marry 
                                                          
1 Government Counsel failed to submit Administrative Notice materials directly pertaining to Ukraine. 
 
3 
 
 
because they got along so well. After their marriage, Applicant returned to his duty 
station and his wife returned to Ukraine. Applicant’s wife joined him at his duty station 
approximately one year after their marriage, when her immigration paperwork had been 
approved. She is currently a Ukrainian citizen. She holds a U.S. green card. She is not 
yet eligible to apply for U.S. citizenship. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 40-49.) 
 
Applicant’s wife owns a tiny, one room flat located in the Ukraine that she 
inherited from her grandmother. She also stands to inherit another tiny two-room flat 
from her mother. Applicant estimates the total value of the two flats to be $10,000. 
Applicant’s wife intends to dispose of the flats after her mother passes away. (GE 2; Tr. 
51-52.) 
 
Applicant’s wife has family in both Ukraine and Russia. Applicant has traveled to 
Ukraine three-to-four times and to Russia twice to meet her family. He testified, 
“hopefully, I am done with that.” He indicated he has no plans or desire to visit Russia 
again. He indicated that his wife will visit her mother in Ukraine next year to renew her 
passport, but that he will not be traveling with her. He also indicated that he seldom 
speaks about work and that his foreign relatives do not know what he does for a living. 
(GE 2; Tr. 50, 66, 70-72.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Russia, living in Ukraine. She is 
approximately 66 years old. She knows no English and Applicant is unable to speak 
with her because he knows no Russian. She moved to Ukraine from Russia when she 
was a child and was employed in Ukraine as a nurse. She is now retired. She is 
supported by a pension she receives from her city of residence. Applicant’s wife 
communicates with her mother approximately every four-to-six months by phone and 
email. Applicant is unable to understand their conversations or read the emails because 
they are strictly in Russian. Neither Applicant nor his wife provides financial support for 
his mother-in-law. (GE 2; Tr. 57-59.) 
 
Applicant’s wife has been estranged from her father since she was approximately 
12 years old. Applicant has never met him and they have no relationship. Applicant’s 
wife does not even know if her father is still living. (GE 2; Tr.56-57.) 
 
Applicant’s wife has an aunt that is a citizen and resident of Russia. Applicant 
does not know her name. He estimates that she is approximately in her late 60’s or 
early 70’s. Applicant has only met his wife’s aunt twice, for a few hours each occasion. 
He was unable to communicate with her because she does not speak English. Neither 
Applicant nor his wife have communicated with this aunt since their visit to Russia in 
approximately 2009. (GE 2; Tr. 61-63.) 
 
Applicant’s wife has two uncles in Russia. One uncle she has not seen or 
communicated with since she was an infant. The other uncle is married to her aunt, 
addressed above. This uncle is identified as employed at the state research and 
production space center in Russia. He used to be a metal cutter there. He is 70 years 
old and has been retired for a number of years. Applicant met him briefly on one of their 
 
4 
 
 
visits to Russia. Applicant testified that the uncle got drunk and passed out during their 
visit. Neither Applicant nor his wife have had any contact with him since that visit. (GE 2; 
Tr. 67-72.) 
 
Applicant’s wife’s cousin and her spouse are citizens and residents in Russia. 
The cousin is a stay-at-home mom and her husband used to work for a church. 
Applicant does not speak to either relative by phone or email. He met them twice, when 
he visited Russia. He and his wife stayed with them during their trips to Russia. 
Applicant’s wife speaks to her cousin every four-to-five months on birthdays or other 
special occasions. Neither Applicant nor his wife provides her cousin’s family any 
financial support. (Tr. 63-65.) 
 
Professional and social references indicate that Applicant demonstrates sound 
judgment, is reliable, trustworthy, and complies with the rules and regulations. 
References further indicated Applicant’s allegiance to the United States is 
unquestionable. (GE 4.) 
 
Russia2 
 
 Russia’s intelligence services conduct a range of activities to collect economic 
information and technology from U.S. targets. Russia remains one of the two most 
aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. economic information and 
technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace methods include targeting of 
U.S. visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as having access to 
sensitive information. Moscow’s intelligence efforts include espionage, technology 
acquisition, and covert action efforts to alter events abroad.  
 
 Laws in Russia allow officials to enter private residences only in the cases 
prescribed by federal law, however authorities do not always observe these restrictions 
in practice. Officials and others engage in electronic surveillance without judicial 
permission and enter residences without warrants. Russian authorities are able to 
monitor calls and have remote access to telecommunication companies databases, 
enabling police to track private email communications and internet activity.  
 
 Russia’s human rights record remains uneven and poor in some areas. Abuses 
reported include: reports of attacks on killings of journalists; physical abuse by law 
enforcement officers; extremely harsh and at times life-threatening prison conditions; 
and arbitrary detention and politically motivated imprisonments. Corruption is 
widespread throughout the government and law enforcement. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
2 All of the information about Russia is contained in Hearing Exhibit I.   
 
5 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(d) Sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require both the presence of foreign contacts and that a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion be present. 
Applicant has foreign family members who are citizens and/or residents of Russia and 
Ukraine. Applicant’s  wife is a citizen of the Ukraine, residing with the applicant. She has 
ties to her family in both Ukraine and Russia. His father-in-law and mother-in-law are 
citizens of Russia residing in Ukraine. His aunt-in-law, two uncles-in-law, and his 
cousin-in-law’s family are all citizens and residents of Russia. One uncle-in-law worked 
for a state research and production space center in Russia. Applicant has visited Russia 
twice and met with his wife’s family on both trips. Government Counsel introduced 
sufficient evidence on Russia’s foreign collection attempts and human rights abuses to 
 
7 
 
 
establish a heightened risk relating to Applicant’s immediate family members in Russia. 
No evidence of heightened risk was presented or established with respect to Ukraine. 
Applicant’s contacts with Russia raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7(a) and 7(d).  
 
Applicant’s wife owns one tiny flat in Ukraine and stands to inherit a second tiny 
flat in Ukraine. The financial interests in these two properties are approximately $10,000 
and are not substantial. Further Department Counsel failed to establish a heightened 
risk present in Ukraine. AG ¶ 7 (e) does not apply. 
  
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. Russia is known to target U.S. 
intelligence information. Further, Russia’s human rights record demonstrates areas of 
concern and there is a risk for U.S. citizens traveling there.  
 
Applicant has a close, familial relationship with his wife, who is a citizen of 
Ukraine and resides with him. He has little to no personal relationship with any of his in-
laws. He lacks the desire and language skills to communicate with his in-laws. However, 
his wife has close emotional ties to her cousin and her mother. They communicate 
several times per year, and Applicant’s wife intends to visit her mother every other year. 
The same cannot be said of her father, aunt, and uncles. There are no apparent ties of 
affection that bind Applicant or Applicant’s wife with her father, aunt, and her uncles. 
She has not seen her father since she was an adolescent and does not even know if he 
 
8 
 
 
is alive. She has not seen one of her uncles since she was an infant. Neither Applicant 
nor Applicant’s wife has had contact with the remaining aunt and uncle in Russia since 
their brief visit in 2009. However, I find the nature of the relationship that Applicant has 
with his wife, and tangentially through his wife to his mother-in-law and cousin-in-law, is 
more than casual and infrequent. Therefore, I cannot find that it is unlikely that Applicant 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his wife, 
mother-in-law, and cousin-in-law. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) apply only with respect to 
Applicant’s father-in-law, aunt, and uncles. 
 
 Applicant has little loyalty to or contacts with Russia, other than his travel there 
twice to meet his wife’s family. He does have close ties of affection to his wife, who 
loves her mother residing in Ukraine and her cousin residing in Russia.  However, he 
also has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties to the United States. His 
father served over 21 years in the Army and is buried in Arlington National Cemetery. 
His mother and siblings reside in the United States and his mother lives in Applicant’s 
home. He travels to the United States to see her every other year. Applicant served in 
the Air Force. He has all of his assets in the U.S. He has dedicated his career to serving 
the United States as a government contractor. Applicant’s loyalties to and in the United 
States indicate that he can be expected to resolve any potential future conflicts of 
interest in favor of the U.S. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
9 
 
 
I have carefully considered all of the evidence and I am convinced Applicant’s 
roots are firmly planted in the United States. Applicant was born and has lived all of his 
life in the U.S. Despite his marriage to a Ukrainian citizen with familial ties to Russia, he 
remains committed to serving the United States as a government contractor. He is a 
trustworthy, rule-oriented individual. I am also convinced that should there ever be a 
conflict of interest, Applicant would clearly resolve it in favor of this country due to his 
steadfast commitment to the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
