KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record
evidence.  Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge was unbiased.  A Judge is
required to address all of the allegations in the SOR.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 10-09281.a1
DATE: 03/05/2012
DATE: March 5, 2012
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-09281
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 15, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On November 30, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Henry Lazzaro denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel cross appealed pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.28.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider, or mis-
weighed, evidence favorable to Applicant; whether the Judge was biased against Applicant; and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Department
Counsel raised the following issue on cross appeal: whether the Judge failed properly to evaluate
some of the Guideline E security concerns.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s
decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant has a history of
employment as an aircraft painter.  He enjoys a good reputation for the quality of his job
performance.  He served in the U.S. Navy for ten years, achieving the rank of petty officer third
class.  
Applicant has had problems with alcohol in past, having been convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol in 1994, 1995, and in 2004.  The first two convictions occurred while he was
serving on active duty with the Navy.  His driving privileges were suspended for five years
following the latest conviction, and he was required to install an alcohol detection device on his
vehicle as well.  In addition to the alcohol convictions, Applicant was charged with driving on a
suspended license, once in 2000 and again in 2006.  The second charge resulted in a conviction.
When questioned about his alcohol misconduct, Applicant initially denied any offenses other
than the one in 2004.  During one interview, Applicant stated that he only drank two or three bottles
of beer a week.  However, he also stated that it took about six bottles to make him drunk and that
he became drunk about once a month.  During another interview, he stated that he became drunk
only once a year.  He also stated that he had attempted either to stop drinking altogether or to reduce
his consumption of alcohol three or four times since his last conviction.  The Judge found his
testimony that he had not drunk alcohol since March 2011 to be unconvincing.
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, for medical expenses, judgments against him, and
various collection accounts.  He attributes the delinquent accounts to a period of unemployment in
the late 2000s.  However, the Judge noted that many of Applicant’s debts were incurred after he had
become employed.  When asked why he had not satisfied even the small debts alleged in the SOR,
Applicant replied, “There’s no reason.”  Decision at 4.
In completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant failed to list the following:
(1) the judgments against him; (2) collection accounts; (3) debts over 180 days delinquent; and (4)
debts currently over 90 days delinquent.  Applicant claimed that he did not know that judgments
were considered financial in nature.  He testified that he did not know why he did not list other
debts, although he also stated that he didn’t understand some of the questions and may have
overlooked others.  
In the Analysis, the Judge noted that, although Applicant’s last drug conviction was in 2004,
Applicant regularly consumed alcohol until June 2010 and that he had only recently had the alcohol
detection device removed from his car.  The Judge stated that he did not find Applicant’s testimony
that he had quit drinking altogether to be convincing.  He concluded that omissions from the SCA
were deliberate, noting that Applicant’s SCA contained many other omissions and false statements,
undermining the credibility of Applicant’s presentation.  The Judge characterized the two suspended
license charges as directly related to the DUI convictions and declined to adjudicate them under
1Applicant was advised in the Prehearing Guidance that the “hearing is an adversarial proceeding in which the
parties have the responsibility to present their respective cases.  The Government is normally represented by an attorney
known as a Department Counsel.”  
2To the extent that Applicant is challenging the Judge’s adverse credibility determination, we conclude that the
credibility determination is consistent with the record.  We note the Judge’s citation to inconsistent statements by
Applicant, as well as to evidence that suggests a reluctance by Applicant to be forthcoming in his answers to on the SCA.
The Judge made specific reference to Applicant’s having stated in the SCA that his 2004 arrest for DUI had resulted in
his having been cleared of the offense, a statement at odds with substantial record evidence of his conviction.  The Judge
Guideline E.  The Judge acknowledged that Applicant’s financial problems had been affected by
unemployment, which was beyond Applicant’s control.  The Judge also noted that Applicant had
demonstrated no effort to pay any of his debts, despite having been employed full-time since
September 2009.  Accordingly, he concluded that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion
as to mitigation.
Applicant’s Appeal
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the record evidence.  He cites to his
good military record; to evidence that he has held a clearance in the past with no security violations;
and to his evidence of good character.  He argues that the Judge either ignored this evidence or that
he did not properly weigh it.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-07080 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2011).  In this case, the Judge
made explicit findings concerning Applicant’s military record and job history.  However, he
provided a rational justification for his adverse decision, given the extent of Applicant’s security
significant conduct.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
record evidence.  Neither has he demonstrated that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
In his appeal brief, Applicant stated that the Judge and Department Counsel were cordial to
him at first, but once the hearing began, the atmosphere became prosecutorial.  He asserted that his
character letters “were thrown to the wayside,” and that “it was stated that these individuals standing
up for me didn’t know who I was and that they wrote those letters blindly.”  He further stated that
he was an honorable person who can admit his mistakes.  Though acknowledging that he had not
used the best judgment in the past, he stated that he had taken steps to address his problems.  He then
declared, “I still feel that my case was handled unfairly.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  
To the extent that Applicant is contending that the Judge was biased against him, the record
does not support such a conclusion.  The challenged comments concerning his character letters were
made by Department Counsel.  Though not objecting to their admission, she pointed out to the Judge
that these letters did not indicate that the writers “have read the Statement of Reasons and
understand what the underlying concerns are with respect to [Applicant’s] clearance.”  Tr. at 23.
This is a fair characterization of the letters.  There is nothing in the record to suggest that the Judge
assumed a prosecutorial role or that he otherwise lacked the requisite impartiality.  Applicant has
not met his heavy burden of persuasion that the Judge was biased.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-
02566 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2010).  Neither has he demonstrated that Department Counsel acted
improperly,1 or engaged in a course of conduct that had the effect of denying Applicant due process.2
reasonably characterized this statement as knowingly false.  We find no basis to disturb the Judge’s credibility
determination.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-08023 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 6, 2011).  
3See Directive ¶ E3.1.25: “The Administrative Judge shall make a written clearance decision in a timely manner
setting forth pertinent findings of fact, policies, and conclusions as to the allegations in the SOR[.]”   This provision does
not authorize a Judge to discuss only some of the allegations.  Rather, “by its plain language it requires the Judge to
address all of them.”  ISCR Case No. 08-07803 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2011).  See also Greater Boston Television Corp.
v. Federal Communications Commission, 444 F.2d. 841, 851 (D.C. Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 403 U.S. 932 (1971), which
requires an agency to give “reasoned consideration to all the material facts and issues” in cases before it.
4Department Counsel also argues that the Judge applied an unreasonably narrow interpretation of Guideline E,
one which we have previously held to be erroneous.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-20964 at 6 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2008).
However, nothing in the Judge’s language suggests that he made this error.  
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-03233 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2009).  Given Applicant’s history of legal
infractions, alcohol-related incidents, delinquent indebtedness, and failure to disclose pertinent
information on his SCA, the Judge’s ultimate decision is not arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Department Counsel’s Cross Appeal  
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s analysis failed to address some of the alleged
Guideline E security concerns.  This argument is persuasive.
Under Guideline G, the SOR alleged, among other things, that Applicant had been convicted
three times of DUI.  Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged two instances of false statements on the
SCA plus the same three DUI convictions.  The SOR contained two additional Guideline E
allegations of Applicant’s having driven under a suspended license.  These two offenses were not
alleged under Guideline G.  However, in the analysis, the Judge stated that the suspended license
charges were directly related to the DUI convictions, and that all these offenses had been adequately
addressed under Guideline G, requiring no separate Personal Conduct consideration.  Decision at
6.  We conclude that the Judge made an error.  While it may be true that the suspension of
Applicant’s license was a consequence of his convictions for DUI, the offenses of driving on a
suspended license are factually and legally different from DUI, and they are properly the subject of
separate SOR allegations.  Disposition of the DUI allegations under Guideline G is not sufficient
to address independent security concerns regarding separate instances of misconduct alleged
elsewhere.  As it stands, the Judge failed to discuss the license allegations in light of the pertinent
security concerns and mitigating conditions of the only guideline under which they were raised,
thereby failing to provide a rational basis for his conclusions regarding them.3  However, even if the
Judge had not made this error, his overall adverse decision would have been the same.  Therefore,
the error is harmless.4  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-01021 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 18, 2011).  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
