 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 10-09689 
                                                                      )                                                  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the transcript, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the 
criminal conduct and personal conduct adjudicative guidelines. His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
                                             Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on May 13, 2010. On July 23, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). On September 20, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
 
2 
 
 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 14, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 
2011. I convened a hearing on January 18, 2012, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through Ex. 6 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant 
testified and called no witnesses. He introduced four exhibits, which were identified and 
marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. D. All of Applicant’s exhibits were entered in 
the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on 
January 26, 2012. 
 
                                                 Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG J, 
Criminal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.) and two aIlegations of disqualifying 
conduct under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.). In his Answer to the 
amended SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under AG J and he denied the two 
allegations under AG E. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and employed as a military equipment inspector by a 
government contractor. He married in May 2011. He is the father of a seven-year-old 
daughter and a two-month old son. (Ex. 1; Tr. 22-23, 34-35.) 
 
 In 2001, Applicant graduated from high school and received a diploma. 
Thereafter, he held a variety of short-term jobs. In 2006, after accumulating debts of 
over $13,000, he declared bankruptcy. In 2007, he enlisted in the U.S. Army, but was 
medically released after four months because he suffered from asthma. He has worked 
for his present employer for approximately eight months. He has held an interim security 
clearance for two years, granted when he worked for a previous government contractor. 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 23, 34.) 
 
 In July 2001, when he was 18 years old, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with possession of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia. Applicant 
appeared in court, entered a no contest plea, and the case was placed on the stet 
docket.1 Applicant was sentenced to one year of unsupervised probation. Applicant 
served the probation, paid the fines and fees, and was not charged with any other 
offenses during his year of probation. Applicant reported that he was told by the judge 
and his public defender attorney that the matter was then dismissed. He also reported 
                                            
1 I take administrative notice that a stet docket is an inactive docket maintained by a prosecutor. Usually, 
a defendant whose case is placed on the stet docket receives a deferred sentence and, barring any 
further criminal behavior by the defendant, the prosecutor will eventually dismiss the charge. 
 
3 
 
 
that he was told by his attorney that the charge would be expunged from his record and 
he had no further obligation to disclose it. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 24-25, 40-42.)  
 
 In his personal subject interview, Applicant told the authorized investigator that 
he used cocaine one time in 2001 or 2002. On his e-QIP, he denied all drug use. He 
told the OPM investigator that his failure to list his cocaine use was an oversight. At his 
hearing, he stated that he did not disclose the frequency of his marijuana and cocaine 
drug use to his Army recruiter. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 42-44.) 
 
 In August 2003, Applicant, who was alone, fell asleep while driving, and the car 
flipped over. He was taken to a local hospital emergency room for treatment. While in 
the hospital, he was questioned by a deputy sheriff about cocaine that had been found 
in his car. In his personal subject interview, he told the investigator that, in response to 
the deputy’s questions, he denied that the cocaine was his. At his hearing, Applicant 
stated: “I fell asleep while driving my vehicle when. . .[the cocaine] was found inside my 
vehicle. I was experimenting with cocaine and it was found, and I got that charge, and I 
have not used it since then.”   (Ex. 2; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he had purchased the cocaine, which weighed about .234 
grams, from a friend. He reported that he was arrested and charged with (1) possession 
of cocaine, a felony, and (2) reckless driving. Applicant pled “no contest” to the felony 
charge. He was assessed $605 in court costs and sentenced to a year of supervised 
probation. He was found guilty of the reckless driving charge and was ordered to pay a 
$100 fine and $186 in court costs. After Applicant served a year of supervised 
probation, the felony charge was dismissed. Applicant stated that his attorney told him 
that the felony charge had been expunged from his record and he had no obligation to 
disclose it on an employment application. When he filed his Army recruitment 
application, Applicant did not initially disclose his marijuana and cocaine arrests and 
charges. However, the information came to light when the Army carried out a criminal 
background check on Applicant, and he was then questioned about it. (Ex. 2; Ex. 4; Ex. 
6; Tr. 45-48.) 
 
 In 2005 and 2006, Applicant was employed as a tow truck driver. In his personal 
subject interview, he told the investigator that he was routinely assigned to handle 
overnight calls for towing assistance. He then reported that one night, while he was 
assigned to overnight duty, two calls came in to the towing business. One call requested 
towing through reimbursement from a travel card and the other requested towing 
assistance to be paid in cash. The travel card customer cancelled his towing request. 
Applicant assisted the cash customer, who paid Applicant $45 for the towing service. 
When he completed his paperwork at the end of his shift, Applicant reported, in error, 
that he had provided towing services to the travel card client. He also indicated that the 
cash client had cancelled his request for towing. When he reported for work the next 
morning, he did not include with his paperwork the $45 he had been paid for the cash 
call and a copy of the receipt he had given to the customer. Applicant’s omission 
became known to the owner of the towing business when the cash client called the 
owner of the towing company to check on the status of his vehicle. (Ex. 2; Tr. 58-62.) 
 
4 
 
 
 In the past, Applicant had failed one or two times to provide his employer with 
cash receipts he had acquired for towing customers at night. This time, however, 
Applicant’s employer called him to his office, and in the presence of a deputy sheriff, 
accused Applicant of embezzling the $45. Applicant told his employer and the sheriff 
that he had inadvertently left the money and the receipt on his dresser at home. The 
employer then fired Applicant and took Applicant’s keys to the towing business. The 
sheriff told the employer that he had 12 months to charge Applicant with embezzlement. 
Applicant drove home, collected the $45 and the receipt, and returned them to the 
employer. The employer gave him his final paycheck. Applicant was never charged with 
an offense. (Ex. 2; Tr. 63-67.) 
 
 When Applicant reported on his e-QIP that he had been fired from his job as a 
tow truck driver, he provided the following information: 
 
[The tow truck company owner] said I stole one whole day’s cash receipts 
from my route. It was a misunderstanding. There was no one in the shop 
when I got back and I took the money home for the night. [The owner] 
again said I stole the money even when I brought it all into work the next 
morning. (Ex. 2 at 37.) 
 
 Applicant also reported that he had left another tow truck company in early 2005 
after his employer gave him notice of unsatisfactory performance. The employer cited 
Applicant for failing, on several occasions, to set the emergency brake on the tow truck 
he was assigned to drive. (Ex. 1.)    
 
 In March 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI), First Offense. Applicant acknowledged that, before the arrest, he had 
consumed five mixed drinks in about two hours at a bar. He failed a field sobriety test. 
He stated that his blood alcohol level was either .132 or .15. (Ex. 5; Tr. 50-53.) 
 
 The charge was reduced to reckless driving. Applicant was sentenced to 90 days 
in jail, all jail time suspended, and placed on one year of unsupervised probation. He 
paid a $500 fine, $159 in court costs, and his driver’s license was suspended for 15 
days. An interlock device to monitor his alcohol consumption was installed on his 
vehicle for three months. He also completed a six-week substance education course. 
(Ex. 5; Ex. C; Ex. D; Tr. 27-29, 53.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant testified that he stopped drinking alcohol in March 2010. 
He stated that one exception to his abstinence occurred when he drank champagne at 
his wedding in May 2011. He further stated that he has no intention of consuming 
alcohol in the future.  (Tr. 29, 35.) 
 
 In June 2011, a special federal agent met with Applicant at a military base where 
he was working as a civilian, presented him with a copy of his July 2010 personal 
subject interview, and asked him to review it and make any necessary corrections and 
revisions. Applicant made several notations and changes to the summary prepared by 
 
5 
 
 
an OPM investigator in July 2010. The following day, Applicant met again with the 
special agent and provided him with his corrected personal subject interview, which he 
then signed and certified, under penalty of perjury, as a true and accurate summary of 
the information he had provided to the OPM agent in July 2010. (Ex. 2; Tr. 55-57.) 
 
 On the June 16, 2011, statement which Applicant signed, edited, and certified, 
the following paragraph appears: 
 
The subject has never been charged with an alcohol offense before. The 
subject no longer drinks and drives. The subject drinks once a month and 
drinks 7 to 8 mixed drinks in one evening. The subject does feel that he is 
intoxicated.2 The subject no longer drinks and drives. (Ex. 2.) 
 
 Applicant asserted under cross-examination that the request to review his July 
2010 personal subject interview “caught him off guard.” He stated that he no longer 
consumes alcohol. (Tr. 55-58.) 
 
 Section 22c on the e-QIP Applicant completed on May 13, 2010, reads: “Have 
you EVER been charged with any felony offense? (Include those under Uniform Code of 
Military Justice.)” (Emphasis in original.) Applicant responded “No” to Section 22c. He 
did not report his arrest and charge of cocaine possession, a felony, in August 2003. At 
his hearing, Applicant explained that he didn’t think he had been charged with a felony 
because the charge had been dismissed after his year of probation. He acknowledged 
that he later understood that he had been charged. However, he also remembered that 
his counsel had told him he did not need to disclose an offense that had been dismissed 
from his record. He also stated that, before responding to Section 22c, he did not seek 
clarification from his facility security officer, and he did not seek clarification from the 
attorney who represented him when he was charged with cocaine possession. He 
acknowledged that he needed a security clearance to do the job he was applying for. 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 68-73.)   
 
 Applicant provided two letters of character reference. The first letter, from his 
former employer, praised Applicant’s “judgment, honesty, integrity, and ability to follow 
rules and regulations” and concluded that he is a very trustworthy and reliable 
employee. The second letter of character reference, from Applicant’s current team lead, 
states that Applicant “has proven himself to be a remarkable responsible and confident 
young man,” who “is trusted with sensitive information daily.” (Ex. A; Ex. B.) 
 
                                                          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
                                            
2 This sentence originally read: “The subject does not feel that he is intoxicated.” In his June 2011 review 
of his statement, Applicant deleted the word “not.” (Ex. 2.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
   
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
7 
 
 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Guideline J, “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  AG ¶30. 
 
  In July 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with marijuana possession and 
possession of drug paraphernalia. In August 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with cocaine possession, a felony. In March 2010, when he was 27 years old, Applicant 
was arrested and charged with DUI, First Offense. These facts are sufficient to raise a 
security concern under AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). AG ¶ 31(a) reads: “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶ 31(c) reads: “allegation or admission or criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.” 
   
  Three criminal conduct mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply. If 
there was “evidence that the person did not commit the offense,” then AG ¶ 32(c) might 
apply. If “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” 
then AG ¶ 32(d) might apply. 
 
  Applicant’s criminal conduct occurred between the ages of 18 and 27, a period of 
nine years. All of Applicant’s criminal conduct dealt with substance abuse. His most 
recent criminal conduct, a DUI, occurred less than two years ago. At his hearing, 
Applicant emphasized that his criminal charges were dismissed after he served 
probation, suggesting that they were of lesser importance and no longer mattered in 
assessing his character and reliability.   
 
  However, the nature of Applicant’s criminal conduct is not easily set aside, 
minimized, or ameliorated. His criminal conduct occurred over a period of nine years, 
during his young adulthood, suggesting a pattern of behavior. Only two years have 
elapsed since Applicant’s most recent episode of criminal behavior. Insufficient time has 
passed to establish that Applicant’s criminal conduct will not recur and impact his 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment in the future. While Applicant presented 
 
8 
 
 
two favorable letters of character reference, he did not provide evidence that 
established successful rehabilitation. I conclude that none of the Guideline J mitigating 
conditions fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations in the SOR raise a security concern under AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and 16(d). AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(d) reads, in pertinent part: “credible adverse 
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be 
sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: (3) 
a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. . .  .”  
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b. SOR ¶ 2.a. alleged that Applicant was 
terminated from his position at the towing company in June 2006 due to allegations that 
he stole cash receipts. SOR ¶ 2.b. alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified his 
response to Section 22c on the e-QIP he signed and certified on May 13, 2010, when 
he answered “No” when asked if he had ever been charged with any felony offenses. 
 
On his e-QIP, Applicant reported that his employer at the tow truck company 
accused him of stealing one day’s cash receipts. Applicant reported that no one was in 
the tow truck office when he returned at the end of the day, and he took the money 
home for safe keeping for the night. He further stated that he brought the money with 
him to work the next day, but even so the owner accused him of theft. 
 
When he spoke with the authorized investigator, Applicant told a different story. 
He stated that he worked a night shift and took two calls, one from a travel card holder 
and one from a cash customer. The travel card customer cancelled his call for a tow. 
Applicant provided tow services to the cash customer and received a payment of $45. 
When he filed his work report the next day to his employer, Applicant did not turn in the 
 
9 
 
 
cash or the receipt from the cash customer. He said he inadvertently left these items at 
home.  
 
Applicant’s differing stories change the details surrounding his employer’s 
accusation of theft. They do not, however, deny that he was accused of theft. The 
differing stories, when considered as a whole, suggest a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations, raise concerns under AG ¶ 16(d)(3), and support a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, further indicating that Applicant 
may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP and responded to Section 22c, he 
answered “No” when asked if he had ever been charged with a felony offense. SOR ¶ 
2.b. alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his answer by failing to disclose his 2003 
arrest for possession of cocaine, a felony. Applicant defended his “No” answer and 
claimed that his attorney told him the charge was expunged from his record after he 
served a year of probation with no other charges. Applicant did not consult the attorney 
or his security manager before responding to Section 22c.  
 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing 
falsification cases: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing 
alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind 
when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under 
Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to 
present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 
(App. Bd. June 9, 2004)).  
 
 Several Guideline mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” If “the refusal or failure to cooperate, 
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security process” and “[u]pon being made aware of 
the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the individual cooperated fully and 
completely,” then AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
 
10 
 
 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. AG 17(d) 
might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to occur.”  
   
 Applicant was fired by an employer in 2006 for allegedly stealing the company’s 
money. Applicant himself reported this on his 2010 e-QIP. He failed to provide evidence 
that the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused this untrustworthy behavior 
were unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application when he enlisted in the 
Army in 2007. On that application, he did not report his arrest for possession of cocaine. 
Later, when the Army investigated his record, the criminal charge appeared, and 
Applicant was asked about it, thereby giving Applicant notice that the matter was of 
consequence. Applicant’s attempt to justify his denial of this same charge on his 2010 
e-QIP by stating that his attorney had assured him that he need not report the charge 
after he served probation was not persuasive. He knew that a felony charge was a 
serious matter and failure to report it on his e-QIP might be considered a security 
concern. For these reasons, he had good reason not to report it. Moreover, he did not 
seek legal advice on the issue of whether or not to report a felony charge, even if 
dismissed after serving a probationary period, on a security clearance application. I 
thoroughly reviewed the documentary evidence in this case. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 
17(a), 17(b), 17(c), and 17(d) do not apply in mitigation to this case.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant is 29 years old. He recently married. His former employer and his 
current team leader praise him as mature and reliable. These facts are positive in his 
favor. However, Applicant also has a criminal record. His most recent criminal arrest 
and charge occurred in 2010. Insufficient time has passed to conclude that his criminal 
conduct will not recur. Applicant falsified his e-QIP by deliberately failing to report that 
he had been arrested and charged with a felony offense.  
 
Applicant provided two different stories to explain why his employer fired him for 
theft in 2006. When he enlisted in the Army in 2007, he did not tell his recruiter about 
his drug use. When he completed his e-QIP, he denied all drug use and an arrest for 
cocaine possession, a felony. When he was confronted in the hospital and told that a 
law officer had found cocaine in his automobile, Applicant denied that it was his. At his 
hearing, he acknowledged that the cocaine found in his automobile was his, and he 
admitted using cocaine. The record evidence suggests that Applicant has difficulty in 
telling the truth and his factual statements are not credible.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under the criminal conduct and 
personal conduct adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.:            Against Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information.  Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
