 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 10-06060
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esquire
Jarrett L. McCormack, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his finances raised by a
delinquent second mortgage that is now resolved. His request for a security clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background investigation, adjudicators
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a
preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to1
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On January 19, 2011, DOHA
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 Department Counsel also provided an index of its documents. It is contained in “Government’s Proposed3
Exhibits” and included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.
2
concerns addressed in the adjudicative guideline (AG)  for financial considerations2
(Guideline F).
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on February 4, 2011, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to an administrative judge on April 20, 2011, but was
transferred to me on November 2, 2011, due to a change in venue. On November 4,
2011, I scheduled this matter for hearing to be held on December 2, 2011. However,
Applicant requested, and I granted, a continuance until December 22, 2011. At the
hearing, the Government presented seven exhibits, which were admitted without
objection, as Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 7.  Applicant testified, presented one3
witness, and proffered four exhibits, which were admitted, without objection, as
Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D. I also left the record open until January 27, 2012, to
receive additional relevant information from the Applicant. Applicant timely submitted
information, which I admitted, without objection, as Ax. E. On February 15, 2012,
Applicant submitted additional information to augment Ax. E. On February 22, 2012,
Department Counsel waived objection to admission of Applicant’s February 15
submission, and I admitted it as Ax. F. DOHA received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing
on January 3, 2012. 
Findings of Fact
In the SOR, the Government alleged that Applicant owed approximately
$199,000 for a charged-off home equity loan (SOR 1.a). Applicant admitted this
allegation, and provided additional explanatory information about the debt. His
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. Having reviewed the response to the
SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 58 years old and requires a security clearance for his position as
chief operating officer (COO) of a logistics company doing business with the
Department of Defense and other federal agencies. He has been with the company
since 2008 and became COO in 2009. Applicant’s professional experience also includes
ownership of his own construction firm after working as a project manager for other
commercial contractors. Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in business
administration in 1981 and a master’s degree in business administration in 2004. His
reputation among his peers and his employees is excellent. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. C) 
Applicant and his wife have been married since 1985. His wife has worked for
over 20 years in the wholesale mortgage industry. They have three adult sons, two of
whom work for Applicant’s company. The other is in his third year of law school. (Gx. 1;
Gx. 2; Tr. 25 - 27)
3
In October 2003, Applicant and his wife bought a second home in the southwest
United States. They initially intended to use it as a rental property, but eventually hoped
to retire there. The two-year-old house was in a golf resort development and they
obtained a $612,000 mortgage for the purchase. The list sale price was $650,000 and
they made a 10% down payment. Applicant and his wife had owned several houses
before this transaction. They followed regular procedures for negotiating through a
realtor. They obtained an inspection that reported few problems, and obtained financing
without any difficulty. Applicant estimated that the market value of the house at the time
was about $850,000. The transaction was done “remotely,” in that Applicant and his
wife were living and working in a different part of the country. They relied on their
realtor, who was located near the property they were buying. The inspection was also
done by a local firm. (Gx. 4; Tr. 50 - 51, 66 - 67)
After they closed on their purchase, they obtained a second mortgage in the form
of a home equity loan for $200,000. Half of those funds was applied to their first
mortgage. The rest went to repairs and improvements of the house. For several months
after they bought the house, weekly renters occupied the house. In the spring of 2004,
the region’s only period of measurable rain, four feet of water flooded the basement.
Applicant had to replace all of the basement furnishings, carpeting, drywall, an air
conditioning unit, and electrical wiring. A few weeks later, the basement flooded again
after heavy rains. It was ultimately determined that the foundation and other engineering
aspects of the house were defective, a fact that the seller probably knew and sought to
conceal. (Gx. 4; Ax. B; Ax. D; Tr. 31 - 34)
In June 2007, Applicant and his wife sued the seller, but their attorney advised
that to pursue their case to fruition would cost about $100,000 in addition to expenses
already incurred to inspect and partially repair the house. In November 2009, they
settled the suit for $30,000 through mediation. (Ax. A) 
Applicant and his wife continued to pay the first and second mortgages until April
9, 2010. They had tried to sell the house, including by short sale, without success, and
they had used all of their available savings, including a retirement account, to cover
their costs and some of their mortgage payments. The home had lost about 50% of its
value because it was structurally unsound. The holder of the first mortgage foreclosed in
about September 2010. The house was eventually resold for about $310,000. (Gx. 4;
Tr. 35 - 38, 65 - 69)
Applicant and his wife thought that the second mortgage had been resolved
through the foreclosure. However, the lender still reported the debt (SOR 1.a) as
delinquent with a balance of $194,210 (Ax. E) They began trying to resolve this debt,
but contact with the lender was frustrating because of a lack of response. (Ax. B; Tr. 40
- 45) It was not until recently that Applicant was able to settle this debt, and the lien held
by the second mortgagor has been released. (Ax. E; Ax. F) 
Applicant earns about $375,000 annually. He also receives an annual bonus
averaging about $125,000 after taxes. After expenses each month, Applicant estimates
he has about $3,000 remaining. Applicant’s net worth, even after exhausting his
savings, is about $500,000. Applicant and his wife have never been delinquent on any
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
4
other debts. They still have a good credit rating and live within their means. Applicant
and his wife estimate that they spent about $260,000 in legal fees and repair expenses
as a result of the damage to their house, but they did not have to borrow to do so. (Tr.
36, 75 - 78) 
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent  with the national interest for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies5
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
5
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The Government presented information that showed Applicant became
delinquent on a second mortgage for a house they bought in 2003. They stopped
paying on both the first and second mortgages in April 2009. The first mortgage was
resolved through foreclosure and resale, but the second mortgage of about $194,000
remained, and was not resolved until January 2012. This information raises a security
concern about Applicant’s finances addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the Government’s information requires application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG
¶ 19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
Of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20, I conclude that the following apply:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant’s finances are, and have always been sound. He is a successful
businessman whose net worth is significant. Aside from the events related to the
purchase of a second house in 2003, he and his wife have always had excellent credit
and there is no indication they have ever had any other delinquencies. The debt at issue
6
here has been resolved. It arose through unforeseen circumstances. Applicant and his
wife relied on a local realtor and a local inspector during the purchase of the house.
While caveat emptor is always good guidance, it appears that material facts about the
house were withheld from Applicant and he was left with an unsalvageable property.
Indeed, the property had lost half of its value by 2009 as Applicant and his wife
exhausted their cash assets in trying to salvage the property. Despite the problems with
the house, they continued to pay their obligations for five years. Their decision to let the
home go to foreclosure at that point, under all of these circumstances, does not reflect
poor judgment or reliability. Although they were mistaken in thinking that the second
mortgage had been resolved, once they learned they were still obliged to pay that loan,
they acted responsibly to resolve it.
 The facts herein constitute the only known financial difficulty Applicant has had,
and he otherwise has managed his personal finances in a sound and prosperous
manner. Based on all of the foregoing, I conclude that this isolated financial difficulty
does not reflect poorly on his overall judgment and reliability. He has mitigated the
security concerns under this guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
I have assessed these facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative
factors, pro and con, under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record in the context
of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I conclude that Applicant is a mature,
responsible person, who is also a successful businessman. In general, his finances
have always been sound, and his response to the problems he encountered here
reflects positively on his suitability for access to classified information. A fair and
commonsense assessment of all available information shows that he is not likely to be a
security risk in the future because of his finances. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
