 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09970 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 20, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on January 26, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 15, 
2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 that were entered into the 
record without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A and B that 
 
2 
 
were entered into the record without objection. The record was left open until February 
22, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional matters. He timely submitted ten documents 
that were marked as AE C through L and entered into the record without objection. 
Department Counsel forwarding memorandum was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) 1. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 6, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old computer customer service representative. Since 
January 2010, a defense contractor has sponsored him for a security clearance. He 
obtained a bachelor’s degree from a major university in 1975 and has some credits 
towards a master’s degree. He is married and has two children, ages 26 and 29, and 
four step-children ranging in ages from 41 to 44. This is his second marriage. He 
married his first wife in 1977, and they divorced in 1989. He married his current wife in 
2001. In the past, he held a security clearance without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had a property foreclosed in 2010 and that he 
had 11 delinquent debts totaling about $389,554. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted each of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.l) with comments. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to two failed businesses. In 2003, he 
was working as a computer technician for a company in State A. He left that job and 
moved to State B with the intention of opening an ice cream and soda shop in a beach 
community. The shop opened in July 2004. It operated during the spring, summer, and 
fall months. Applicant stated initially that this business did “very well” from 2004 to 2006, 
but later indicated that it basically broke even. In 2004, he and his wife built a new 
house on waterfront property. The house was initially appraised at $319,000. In 2007, 
he decided to open another ice cream and soda shop in a beach community in State C. 
He thought that, by opening this second shop, his business would get more visibility and 
generate franchising opportunities. To open this second business, he needed cash and 
had the house appraised again. At that point, it was appraised at $465,000. In early 
2007, he took out a $227,000 equity loan on the house for use in opening the second 
shop. The second shop opened in April 2007 and was a year-round operation.3  
 
 Due to a downturn in the economy, the amount of business traffic at the first shop 
declined soon after he opened the second shop. From 2008 to 2010, the gross income 
in the first shop was about half of what was earned in the earlier years. Additionally, the 
business he expected at the second shop never materialized. He used personal funds 
and retirement saving to keep the businesses open. In the fall of 2009, he indicated that 
his financial situation fell apart. The interest rates on the credit cards used to finance the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4-6; GE 1; AE C. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 18-30, 32-39, 54-56; GE 1; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
businesses jumped from about 9.9% to 24.9% or higher. At that point, he could not 
make the payments on the credit cards. Both businesses eventually failed. The second 
shop closed in September 2009, while the first closed in November 2010. In November 
2011, he sold the building in which first shop was located for $125,000 and, with the 
proceeds from that sale, paid the state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.c) and a bank loan of about 
$78,000 that was not alleged on the SOR.4 
 
 The original mortgage on the house was $204,000. It was a fixed mortgage with 
an interest rate of about 8% and a monthly payment of $1,200. While Applicant and his 
wife owned the house, they paid the mortgage down to about $178,000. As their 
financial situation worsened, they tried to refinance the home, but were unsuccessful. 
Between August and October 2009, they stopped making the mortgage payments and 
vacated the property. In July 2010, the house was foreclosed (SOR ¶ 1.a) and sold for 
$174,000. Applicant stated the foreclosure sale satisfied the original mortgage. Since 
the foreclosure sale, he has not received any delinquency notices from the creditor 
holding the original mortgage. His credit report dated February 3, 2012, indicated the 
original mortgage had a zero balance. The original mortgage is resolved.5 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a nurse. She had a job at which she earned about $100,000 
per year and her income helped support the businesses. In August 2010, she lost her 
job due to a downturn in the economy. Since then, she has worked sporadically as a 
consultant for health insurance carriers performing medical reviews. At present, her 
income fluctuates. Some months she might earn $4,000, while other months she earns 
little.6 
 
 Applicant’s medical condition also negatively impacted his financial situation. In 
December 2010, he was diagnosed with Stage IV Colon Cancer that spread to other 
organs. He is currently undergoing treatments. In October 2011, he was able to obtain 
healthcare insurance. His monthly healthcare insurance payments are $388 with a 
$5,000 deductible. None of the alleged debts are medical bills.7 
 
 The tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.b for $49,853 was filed in May 2011. Applicant indicated 
that this lien was for tax years 2005 through 2008. He stated he was “not the world’s 
best record keeper” and fell behind on his taxes. He also indicated that he was late in 
filing his federal and state tax returns for 2006 through 2008. He filed those returns 
about two years after they were due. He also indicated that his wife did not pay her self-
employment tax. They incorrectly thought losses from the businesses would offset the 
self-employment taxes. In 2005 or 2006, they made monthly payments of about $300 
towards those delinquent taxes. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) informed them that 
they had to increase the amount of their payments, but they were unable to do so. Since 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 18-30, 32-34, 55-57; AE A, B, J, L; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 Tr. at 20, 25-26, 32-36, 41-45; GE 1, 2; AE A; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
 
6 Tr. at 26, 39-41; AE A. L.   
 
7 Tr. at 23-24, 26-27, 63-67; AE A; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
 
 
4 
 
2006, Applicant indicated they have made minimal payments towards this debt. At 
present, they are current in the filing of their tax returns. In August 2011, they hired a 
law firm to assist in resolving this tax issue and subsequently switched to another law 
firm. They are seeking to submit an offer in compromise for the delinquent federal taxes. 
This lien is unresolved.8 
 
 The state tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.c for $8,976 was filed in February 2010. As noted 
above, this tax lien was paid when the first shop in State B was sold. In his post-hearing 
submission, Applicant provided a document from State B indicating the tax lien was 
released in November 2011. This debt is resolved.9 
 
 The charged-off home equity line of credit in SOR ¶ 1.h for $227,000 was the 
loan that Applicant obtained to open the second shop in State C. The date of last 
activity on this debt was September 2009. Applicant provided no proof of payments 
towards this debt. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
 The charged-off debt in SOR ¶ 1.i was a credit card account. The date of last 
activity on this debt was November 2009. Applicant testified that he has been making 
monthly payments of $250 for over a year to a law firm for this debt. In his post-hearing 
submission, he provided a letter from the law firm indicating they agreed to a payment 
arrangement. However, he provided no proof that he has been making payments under 
that arrangement. This debt is unresolved.11 
 
 The remaining seven delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.k, and 
1.l totaling $78,892 are credit card accounts that were used for the businesses. The 
dates of last activity on these debts range from March 2009 to September 2010. 
Applicant provided no proof of payments towards these debts. They remain 
unresolved.12 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant was open and honest about his financial problems. He 
has been working with an accountant and lawyer on his delinquent debts. In January 
2012, Applicant contacted a credit repair company to assist in settling his delinquent 
debts. He stated that he is current on his monthly bills. In his post-hearing submission, 
he submitted a list of monthly bills and expenses that shows he lives modestly. He did 
not provide a document that reflected his and his wife’s monthly income. He currently 
has two cars. He bought one car for $16,000 in 2009. The other car is a 2006. His total 
monthly car payments are $648. The list of monthly bills and expenses reflect that he is 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 45-49, 70-71; GE 1, 2; AE B, H, I; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. From AE I, it is not 
clear whether the firm representing Applicant is a law firm. 
 
9 Tr. at 49-50, 55-56; GE 2; AE B, E. 
 
10 Tr. at 28-29, 54-58; GE 3 
 
11 Tr. at 58-60; GE 2, AE B, F; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
12 Tr. at 50-51; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
making monthly payments towards one of the alleged debts (SOR ¶ 1.i) in the amount 
of $200 per month.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 27-28, 65-72; AE B, H-L. 
 
6 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
 
7 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, ongoing, and significant. Based on the evidence 
presented, I cannot find they are unlikely to recur or that they do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
An economic downturn negatively impacted Applicant’s businesses. His 
delinquent federal taxes, however, predated that economic downtown. Applicant’s 
medical problems and his wife’s loss of employment negatively impact their current 
financial situation, but those conditions predated most of the delinquent debts. At 
present, he has not implemented a realistic plan for resolving his financial problems. AG 
¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
Applicant has consulted with an accountant, a law firm, and a debt repair 
company. He paid the state tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.c. He indicated that he is making 
payments towards the debt in SOR. ¶ 1.i, but provided no proof of those payments. The 
remaining debts are unresolved. He has failed to show that these remaining debts are 
being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies to SOR ¶ 1.b. Despite some mitigation, Applicant’s financial problems remain a 
security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Specifically, I considered Applicant’s employment record and his efforts to resolve his 
 
8 
 
financial problems. He was open and honest about his financial problems. His medical 
problems and his wife’s loss of employment have negatively impacted their ability to 
resolve their financial problems. Nevertheless, I conclude that Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
