 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01350    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has over $19,000 in 
unresolved delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on September 14, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR, which 
detailed the reasons for the action under the financial considerations guideline, 
recommended the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on December 2, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 14, 2011. 
He did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. These items are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant timely submitted a 
response, which is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on January 23, 2012. 
  
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a federal contractor. Married 18 years, he 
is the father of three teenaged children. He served two tours of duty in the Army from 
1990 to 1995 and from 2002 to 2005, respectively. Since being honorably discharged 
from military service, he has worked as a federal contractor on a series of overseas 
assignments between September 2006 and at least September 2009.2 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to 26 creditors for approximately 
$21,470. He denies each of the debts alleged in the SOR. In his security clearance 
application, Applicant attributed his financial problems to a series of circumstances: his 
wife incurring debt in his absence; the malfeasance of a family member Applicant 
trusted to manage his finances while he worked overseas; and his wife needing medical 
treatment at a time the family was not covered by medical insurance. Despite his SOR 
denials, Applicant believes that he is responsible for the delinquent debt he has 
incurred. He believes it is more responsible to pay the debt himself than to file for 
bankruptcy protection.3 
 
 In April 2010, Applicant enrolled in a debt repayment program to resolve his 
delinquent debt. However, after taking money management classes at his church, he 
withdrew from the program and instituted a debt repayment plan of his own. He claims 
that he has resolved all of the debts alleged in the SOR. The record establishes that 
Applicant has resolved the debts alleged in paragraphs 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., and 1.v.4  
 
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 GE 3, 5, 8; AE A. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Both disqualifying conditions apply. Although Applicant denies the debts alleged 
in the SOR, the Government’s evidence establishes a prima facie case against him. 
Since at least 2005, Applicant has accumulated over $21,000 in delinquent debt, the 
majority of which, based on the record, remains unresolved. 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 205 apply. Applicant 
presented insufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns alleged in the SOR. He 
provided no evidence to corroborate his claims regarding the origins of his financial 
problems, the resolution of the accounts alleged in the SOR, or the rehabilitation of his 
finances. In light of the sparse evidence provided by Applicant, I find that his financial 
problems are recent and ongoing. Also, given the paucity of information available, I am 
unable to determine that Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
Consequently, Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept. Although I view Applicant’s payment of four SOR debts and 
his desire to resolve all of his indebtedness favorably, the limited information available 
has not convinced me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a 
security clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
                                                          
5 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
5 
 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Following Egan6 and 
the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security. Accordingly, this case is decided against the Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs  1.a., 1.b., 1.e., 1.g.-1.u., 1.w.-1.z.: Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.v.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
6 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
