KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: On appeal Applicant contends that the Judge failed properly to apply the mitigating
conditions, citing to evidence that his financial problems were related to his job loss.  The Board
finds no reason to conclude that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 10-03701.a1
DATE: 03/14/2012
DATE: March 14, 2012
In Re:
----------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-03701
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Warren J. Borish, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 27, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
1The Judge found that Applicant “ provided documentary evidence regarding his actions to address some of [his]
debts.  However, no documentary evidence was introduced regarding any of the other delinquent debts noted in the
SOR.”  Decision at 3. 
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On November 21, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Arthur E.
Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his application
of the pertinent mitigating conditions and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s
decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an engineer working
for a Defense contractor.  Applicant’s monthly income includes his current salary plus a monthly
pension.  He supplemented his income by teaching and by tutoring, but the teaching position was
eliminated in 2009, resulting in a loss of $6,000 to $7,000 annually.  Applicant fell behind on his
mortgage payments.  Additionally, his 24-year-old son, who lives away from home, is unemployed
and has health problems.  Applicant provides his son’s rent, groceries, phone/cable/internet costs,
taxes, etc., and he is a co-signer on his son’s college loans.  The son is waiting to resolve a medical
condition before he seeks employment.  Applicant does not have a savings or checking account.  He
cashes his monthly checks and pays his bills in cash.  The SOR alleged 23 delinquent debts.  Three
have been paid or settled, and the Judge also found that Applicant had possibly made “cursory,
incomplete attempts” on five others.  The Judge resolved the three paid debts in Applicant’s favor.
He entered adverse findings for the remaining ones, citing a lack of evidence of payment or other
significant efforts at debt resolution.1  Applicant first experienced financial problems in 2008, a year
before he lost his teaching job.  He has considered filing for bankruptcy protection, though by the
close of the record Applicant had not filed.  Chapter 13 bankruptcy is his only articulated strategy
for addressing his debts.  Applicant owes both federal and state taxes, though these debts were not
alleged in the SOR.  Applicant’s wife is not able to work, due to medical problems. 
In the Analysis portion of the Decision, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances
raised Financial Considerations security concerns.  In examining Applicant’s case for mitigation,
he stated that Applicant’s debts are multiple and, for the most part, unaddressed.  He noted that
Applicant’s financial problems were, to a limited extent, affected by circumstances beyond his
control.  However, Applicant has not taken steps to reduce his expenditures, for example seeking
his son’s cooperation.  The Judge concluded that Applicant “has not fully committed to a bankruptcy
plan” and that “Applicant has been exceptionally indulgent with regard to his grown, educated, and
unemployed adult son.”  Decision at 7, 8.  Accordingly, Applicant has not demonstrated a history
of debt repayment under such a plan.  
Applicant contends that the Judge failed properly to apply the mitigating conditions, citing
to evidence that Applicant’s problems were related to his job loss, arguing that this event was at the
root of his many delinquencies.  Applicant’s argument appears to be little more than a disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  After considering the record as a whole, we find no
reason to conclude that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s conclusion that he is not fully committed
to bankruptcy and that he is indulgent to his son.  In discussing the first of the challenged statements,
Applicant cites to evidence outside the record, which we cannot consider.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29
(“No new evidence shall be received or considered by the Appeal Board”).  We have examined these
statements and find them to be reasonable inferences from the evidence.  Moreover, they support
the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant has failed to demonstrate mitigation.  Applicant argues the
Judge erred in placing the origin of Applicant’s financial difficulties in 2008 rather than 2009, when
Applicant suffered a decline in income.  Given that the amount of the delinquencies exceeds
$100,000, this argument is not persuasive, even if one accepts Applicant’s claim on appeal that the
decline was $12,000 rather than the $6,000 to $7,000 that the Judge found.     
In support of his appeal, Applicant has submitted other Hearing Office decisions, which he
contends support his case for a security clearance.  We give these cases due consideration.
However, Hearing Office decisions are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal
Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-00218 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2011).  The cases which
Applicant has cited have significant factual differences from his own.  They do not demonstrate that
the Judge’s adverse findings were arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
      
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED. 
 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
