 
1 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 10-00564 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On August 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Appellant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on September 16, 2011, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On November 7, 2011, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 14, 2011. 
 
2 
 
 
The case was heard on January 12, 2012, as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E into evidence without objection. 
The record remained open until January 30, 2012, to give Applicant an opportunity to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted two exhibits that I marked as 
AE F and G and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on January 25, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated into the following findings of 
facts: 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and engaged to be married. He anticipates completing 
an associate’s degree in May 2012. He served in the Navy from June 14, 1999 until 
November 20, 2007, when he was honorably discharged. Immediately after his 
discharge, he began a position as an engineering technician with his current employer. 
(Tr. 15-16.)  
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol at the age of 15 or 16 while in high school. 
(Tr. 19.) He and friends drank beer at parties. He admitted that at times he consumed 
alcohol to the point of intoxication from 1996 to at least April 2010. (AR.) 
 
  Applicant has a history of alcohol-related incidents. In November 1999 he was 
arrested and charged with Minor-Consumption of Alcoholic Beverage, Operating a 
Vehicle with a BAC of .08% or more, and Operating a Vehicle while Intoxicated. He pled 
guilty to Operating a Vehicle with a BAC of .08% or more. The court sentenced him to 
one year of jail, suspended, placed him on probation for one year, and fined him $250, 
plus court costs and fees. The other charges were dismissed. This incident occurred 
after he completed boot camp and was home at Thanksgiving. (Tr. 21.) He and his 
friends were consuming alcohol at a party. At some point he decided to leave the party 
and drive to a former girlfriend’s house. He was subsequently stopped and arrested by 
the police. (Tr. 22.)   
 
   In January 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with Illegal Consumption of 
Alcoholic Beverage, a misdemeanor. He pled guilty to the charge. The court sentenced 
him to 60 days of jail, suspended, placed him on probation for one year, and fined him 
$300, plus court costs and fees. He subsequently attended a Navy Level II treatment 
program at Great Lakes, Illinois, where he was diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent. (Tr. 
31; GE 6.) He was abstinent for four months after completing the program. (Id.) 
 
 On August 19, 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving or 
Operating a Motor Vehicle while Having a Blood Alcohol Concentration of 0.08. He pled 
guilty. The court sentenced him to jail for 60 days, with 55 days suspended and fined 
him $300 plus costs. The court suspended his driver’s license for 12 months and 
 
3 
 
 
ordered him to attend an alcohol treatment program. This incident occurred after 
Applicant and a friend were consuming pitchers of beer at a bar and he decided to drive 
home. (Tr. 32; GE 2 at 2.)   
 
 On November 22, 2004, Applicant entered the Navy’s alcohol inpatient treatment 
program. On December 17, 2004, his physician discharged him with a diagnosis of 
Alcohol Dependence. (GE 6 at 3.) The treatment summary noted that Applicant 
“appeared compliant, but not sincere about his desire for recovery.” (Id.) His physician 
indicated that his “prognosis for continued recovery was fair, provided he adheres to the 
recommended continuing care plan.” (Id.) Applicant acknowledged that at the time he 
was irresponsible and “resistant to treatment” because he did not believe he needed to 
be in the program. (Tr. 35.) He participated in recommended aftercare program for 
about six months. He does not think he remained abstinent for very long after he left the 
treatment facility. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 On October 12, 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with Appearing in 
Public While Intoxicated, a misdemeanor. He pled guilty and was fined $50 and ordered 
to pay court costs. This arrest occurred after he and his friends were consuming alcohol 
at a local bar and he decided to walk home intoxicated. The police stopped him in a 
parking lot. (Tr. 37.)  
 
 In April 2009 Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Operating a Vehicle 
While Intoxicated/Endangering a Person, and (2) Operating a Vehicle with a BAC of 
08% or more. He pled guilty to Count 2, and Count 1 was dismissed. The court 
sentenced him to jail for 60 days, suspended except for two days with good time and 
credit for one day served. The court placed him on probation for one year and 
suspended his driver’s license for 90 days. He was fined $300, plus court costs. The 
court ordered him to undergo a drug and alcohol evaluation, and complete any 
recommended treatment.1  Applicant was working for his current employer at this time. 
 
 Applicant was visiting his family on the night of the incident. After he and his 
brother had dinner with their family they returned to his brother’s home. Applicant went 
to bed, but was later awakened by his intoxicated brother who wanted him to pick up his 
girlfriend. Applicant initially refused because he had consumed eight to nine beers that 
night. (GE 2 at 2.) However, the brother prevailed in his “nagging” and Applicant 
consented. (Tr. 41.) He was subsequently stopped by the police and arrested. Applicant 
stated that his brother did not have a driver’s license because he had received too many 
tickets in the past and did not have a car. (Tr. 42.)  Applicant acknowledged he made a 
serious mistake that night.  
 
 A social worker assessed Applicant for substance abuse on October 6, 2009, 
and recommended that he participate in the county’s relapse prevention program. He 
                                                     
1 During the hearing, Department Counsel noted that on the Case Summary for the 2009 Criminal Docket 
Sheet recorded that on 2/3/10 a warrant was issued for Applicant’s arrest because of a probation 
violation. (GE 8 at 3.) Applicant submitted a corrected Docket Sheet indicating that the above notation 
was entered in error. (AE G.) 
 
4 
 
 
completed it on December 4, 2009. (Tr. 48; AE D.) Applicant thinks he was assessed as 
being alcohol dependent. (Tr. 47.) The last time he participated in any form of aftercare 
treatment program or 12-Step meetings was sometime after he completed this program. 
(Tr. 63.) 
 
 In June 2009 Applicant met a government investigator to discuss his alcohol use. 
He told the investigator that he consumed six beers every Friday night with friends to 
relax and end his boredom. At that time he tried to restrict his alcohol consumption to 
weekly use and not daily use. (GE 2 at 3.)  
 
 While testifying Applicant stated that he currently consumes alcohol. He had two 
glasses of wine the night before this hearing. He normally drinks two or three times a 
week, generally consuming wine or beer. (Tr. 20, 59.) The longest period of time that he 
remained sober was during deployments, six or seven months. (Tr. 56.) He admitted 
that health care professionals have told him to stop consuming alcohol because he is 
alcohol dependent and may find himself “in trouble.” (Tr. 59.) He continues to drink 
alcohol nonetheless. (Id.) He does not believe that he needs to cease consuming 
alcohol because he no longer drinks to intoxication and does not place himself into 
situations that can potentially create problems. (Tr. 64.) He stated he knows how to 
control his drinking. (Tr. 65.) 
  
 Applicant now lives a more mature life. He purchased a house in April 2011. He 
is enrolled in college and obtains good grades. (Tr. 66; AE E.) Applicant’s senior 
department manager wrote that since September 2008 Applicant has “consistently 
demonstrated the high level of honesty and integrity required by our technical staff . . . . 
In addition, he has expressed clear remorse for his actions that led up to the DUI.” (AE 
A.) Applicant’s supervisor for the past three years found Applicant “to be dependable, 
honest, and hard-working.” (AE B.) Applicant submitted his Performance Evaluation for 
the 2008 to 2009 period. He was rated as slightly above the “At Standard” level. (AE C.)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set 
out in AG ¶ 21: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and maybe 
disqualifying. The potentially disqualifying conditions established by the evidence in this 
case are:  
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
6 
 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
Applicant was arrested and found guilty of four criminal incidents and one 
ordinance violation involving alcohol in 1999, 2000, 2004, 2005, and 2009. AG ¶ 22(a) 
is established. Applicant consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment from 1996 
up to April 2010, raising a concern under AG ¶ 22(c). Applicant has been diagnosed as 
Alcohol Dependent three times, the most recent being in 2004 when a physician at an 
alcohol treatment center evaluated him and made that diagnosis. Security concerns 
under AG ¶ 22(d) are supported by the record. Subsequent to that diagnosis, Applicant 
relapsed, establishing a concern under AG ¶ 22(f).  
Potentially mitigating conditions are set forth in AG ¶ 23. The conditions that 
could apply to mitigate the security concerns arising from Applicant’s alcohol 
consumption are:  
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s background includes five alcohol-related incidents that occurred 
between 1999 and 2009. Given the ten-year span of time in which those incidents 
occurred, the passage of three years since the last incident is insufficient to trigger the 
application of AG ¶ 23(a) to those allegations.  
Applicant admitted that in the past he used poor judgment while consuming 
alcohol, but he does not comprehend that he has a significant alcohol problem, despite 
his diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence. He continues consuming alcohol. AG ¶ 23(b) has 
no application. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 23(c).  
 Applicant completed three alcohol treatment programs but has not consistently 
participated in aftercare programs. He has not demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of sobriety. His evaluating physician in the 2004 treatment program gave him a 
fair prognosis if he continued to consume alcohol. AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply to the 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 31-year-old man, who 
honorably served this country from 1999 to 2007. During that time he was arrested and 
charged four times with alcohol-related incidents. After leaving the Navy, he was 
arrested again in 2009 for driving while intoxicated. His license has been suspended 
three times, and he has been placed on probation four times. He attended alcohol 
treatment programs three times. He acknowledges his Alcohol Dependence diagnosis, 
yet he chooses to continue consuming alcohol. The last conviction occurred in April 
2009 after he had consumed alcohol and allowed his brother to persuade him to get into 
 
8 
 
 
his car and drive. That is a significant fact in this case and indicates the seriousness of 
his alcohol problem and its potential for impairing his judgment.  
 
Although Applicant submitted evidence of his successful work history, academic 
achievement, and financial accomplishments, and he testified honestly about his past, 
those facts do not outweigh his decision to continue to consume alcohol. Until he 
recognizes his alcohol issues, establishes a pattern of sobriety and behavioral changes, 
confirmed by a health care provider with a specialty in substance abuse, the likelihood 
that similar incidents will recur is high.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the Alcohol 
Consumption guideline. 
 
 Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a though 1.g:  Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
