  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02558 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed approximately $32,000 on 16 delinquent obligations. He has paid 
or is making payment on half of the obligations. He plans to address the remainder. 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under financial considerations. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 29, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
  
1 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
 
 
 On September 13, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On January 12, 2012, I was assigned the case. On January 19, 2012, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on February 1, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 9, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information. On February 10, 2012 and February 28, 
2012, additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the 
material, which was admitted into the record as Exs. D through L. On February 15, 
2012, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1. 
m. He admitted the remaining factual allegations, with explanations. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations and supporting documents 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old test engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since November 2009. His annual income is $58,000, but last year, with overtime, he 
made approximately $65,000. (Tr. 30) From 1994 through 1996, he was a member of 
the Army National Guard. (Tr. 27) In 1996, he entered active duty with the U.S. Army 
and left in April 2008 as a sergeant (E-5). (Tr. 28) He remained a drilling reservist for 
one year after leaving active duty. (Tr. 28)  
 
Applicant’s co-workers state: Applicant is very goal oriented, a team player, 
attentive to detail, and devoted to his work. He is motivated, conscientious, well 
organized, thrives under adversity, and is a productive employee. (Exs. D and E)  
 
On Applicant’s February 2008 Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions, Standard 
Form (SF) 86 and on his December 2009 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he indicated he had filed bankruptcy in December 1997 and was 
more than 180 days delinquent on financial obligations. (Ex. 1, 2, 3) He listed his 
delinquent obligations on those forms. He indicated his financial problems started with 
his divorce and loss of full-time employment in April 2009.  
 
 In 1997 and 1998, Applicant filed for Chapter 7, bankruptcy protection. As a 
junior enlisted member he got caught up in a series of payday loans. (Tr. 53) He 
reaffirmed his car loan and a military credit card account. (Tr. 25) From his bankruptcy 
until 2006, he asserts he had good credit. (Tr. 25)  
 
 In July 2005, Applicant purchased a $125,000 home with $865 monthly mortgage 
payments. (Ex. 6) He fell behind on his payments and agreed to pay an additional $235 
monthly on his mortgage. He did so until May 2009, when he began working part time. 
In November 2009, when he obtained his current job, he realized he could no longer 
3 
 
 
 
afford the home and put it on the market. (Tr. 26) Additionally, his home and new job 
were in separate states. (Tr. 47) In February 2010, the house went to foreclosure. The 
mortgage company sent him an IRS Substitute Form 1099-A, which indicated the loan 
balance exceeded the fair market value of the home by $237. (Ex. 7, Ex. G, Tr. 30) The 
mortgage lender has not asked Applicant to repay this amount.  
 
 In 2006, Applicant separated from his wife and was divorced in February 2008. 
His household income was cut in half. In 2008, he decided to leave the Army in hopes 
of getting a better-paying job so he could pay his debt. (Tr. 25) From April 2008 to April 
2009, he worked as an IT technician and radio-support technician. (Tr. 25) From April 
2009 through November 2009, he worked only part time. (Tr. 26) 
 
 In November 2009, Applicant began paying his delinquent obligations after 
starting his current job. He first started making monthly payments to pay off the 
collection account (SOR 1.m, $890), which he has paid. (Attachment 2 to SOR Answer, 
Tr. 26)  
 
 Following Applicant’s bankruptcy, he reaffirmed a military department store 
account obligation (SOR 1.n). From May 2008 to March 2009, Applicant’s pay was 
garnished $100 monthly and applied to his account. (Ex. 6) His 2008 federal income tax 
refund of $800 and his 2010 tax refund of $4,000 were intercepted and paid on this 
obligation. (Tr. 31) The obligation has been paid and his monthly garnishment, which 
had increased to $300 monthly, ended. (Ex. 7, Tr. 31) 
 
 Applicant is making monthly payments on his US Vet Administration collection 
account. (Exs K and L) He intends this to be the next bill he pays off. (Tr. 36) He intends 
to address his federal obligations first then to pay his other debts starting with the 
smallest. (Tr. 48)  
 
 As of January 2010, Applicant had not received any financial counseling or used 
a debt consolidation service. (Ex. 6) He has since talked to a number of financial 
counseling services including CCCS, but was told they could not work with him due to 
the outstanding VA obligation. (Tr. 50) He listens to financial advisors on the radio. (Tr. 
51)  
 
 In May 2011, he completed a monthly budget which indicated his net monthly 
income was $2,896 and his monthly expenses were $2,455, which left a net remainder 
of $441. (Ex. 7) At that time, he was making a $227 monthly van payment to his father 
for a 2002 Nissan; $285 monthly payments on his 2003 Chevrolet pickup, $512 monthly 
payments on the debt listed in SOR 1.n, and $150 payments on the debt in SOR 1.d. 
He is current on his truck and van payments and his utility bills. (Tr. 33, 53) The debts in 
SOR 1.n and 1.d have now been paid. (Exs. H and J) His current wife does not work 
and they have a four-year-old son. (Tr. 31) He has three percent of his pay going to a 
company retirement savings account. (Tr. 49) He currently has $6,585 in this account. 
(Ex. F)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s financial delinquent account and their current status 
follows: 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Medical collection 
account. 
$15 Paid in September 2011. (Ex. C, 
Enclosure 3 to SOR Answer, Tr. 35) 
b Charged-off credit card 
account. (Ex. 6) 
$565 
 
Unpaid. (Tr. 36) Applicant obtained the 
card in an attempt to rebuild his credit. 
c Charged-off credit card 
account. 
$589 
 
Unpaid. (tr. 37) Applicant obtained the 
card in an attempt to rebuild his credit. 
d Collection account for 
jewlery store credit card. 
(Ex. 6) 
$1,192 Paid. As of April 2011, Applicant was 
making $150 monthly payments on this 
debt. (Ex. 7, Enclosure 1 to SOR 
Answer, Tr. 37) As of October 2011, it 
was settled in full. (Ex. H)  
e Collection account for a 
hardware store. (Ex. 6)  
$6,372 Unpaid. (Tr. 38) 
f Collection account on a 
credit card account. (Ex, 
6)  
$1,996 Unpaid. February 2008 divorce decree 
assigned this debt to Applicant’s ex-wife 
for payment. (Ex. A) If she does not pay 
the debt, he will. (Tr. 39)  
g Collection account on a 
bank credit card account. 
(Ex, 6) 
$8,794 Unpaid. In January 2010, he stated he 
would resume payment when he was 
able. 
h US Vet Administration 
collection account for an 
overpayment on GI Bill 
tuition. (Tr. 41) . 
$2,349 Paying. In February 2012, Applicant 
received an offer to make monthly 
payments on this debt, which he is 
paying. (Exs. K and L)  
i US VA collection account. $125 Paid. (Ex. L)  
j Collection account. $34 Paid. (Enclosure 4 to SOR Answer, Ex. 
Tr. 43) 
k Collection account on a 
book club account. (Ex, 
6)  
$73 Unpaid. (Tr. 44) 
l Collection account for 
internet service. (Ex. 6, B)  
$182 
 
Paying. Has agreed to a repayment plan 
and in January 2012, he paid half the 
balance. (Ex. I, Tr. 44, 45) 
m Collection account on a 
department store credit 
card account. (Ex, 6)  
$890 
 
Paid. (Attachment 2 to SOR Answer, Tr. 
46) 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
n Garnishment for a military 
store credit card. (Ex. 6)  
$8,485 Paid. (Ex. J, Tr. 46)  
o Collection account for a 
credit card. 
$1,306 
 
Unpaid. (Tr. 47) 
p December 1997 Chapter 
7 Bankruptcy. 
$ 
 
 
q Home foreclosure 2010.  $ 
 
Foreclosure in February 2010. The loan 
balance exceeded the fair market value 
by $237. (Ex. G)  
 Total debt listed in SOR $32,677  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
6 
 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant has had to resort to 
bankruptcy protection in 1997 and currently has approximately $32,000 in delinquent 
obligations. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
7 
 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has paid or is paying eight of the sixteen past-due obligations. His 
home went to foreclosure and the outstanding loan balance on the property exceeded 
the home’s fair market value by $237. The mortgage company has not requested 
payment of this amount. He has paid or is paying on more than $13,000 of the $32,000 
of past due obligations, which is approximately forty percent of the total debt. In the 
past, he has arranged to make monthly payments on certain obligations and his 
honoring of those agreements give assurance he will continue to do so on his current 
arrangements.  
 
 As a junior enlisted service member, Applicant got in financial problems due to 
pay day loans and sought bankruptcy protection. From that date until he separated from 
his wife, he was paying has bills as agreed. His credit was good enough for him to 
purchase a home. In 2008, he not only experienced the financial burden of divorce, but 
also left active duty in search of a higher paying job. A year after leaving the service, his 
income was reduced because of eight months of part-time employment.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems are numerous and recent. 
Although he went through divorce and under-employment, neither is such an unusual 
event to find that such events would never recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced both separation and divorce along with 
the financial burden associated with each. Additionally, he was under employed for 
eight months before securing his current job. His financial problems are not completely 
over, but he is addressing his past-due obligations to the best of his ability. AG & 20(b) 
applies. 
 
Applicant is not making payment on each of the SOR obligations. He has 
determined to address the federal debts first and then address the other debts starting 
with the smallest and progressing to the largest. Good-faith requires a showing that a 
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to 
duty or obligation. Applicant is acting in good-faith. In evaluating his assertion that he 
will continue to address his obligations, his past conduct must be evaluated. His 
promises to pay must be reviewed by looking at his past track record.  
8 
 
 
 
The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish 
that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him 
to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s past conduct addressing his 
finances is considered in evaluating the extent to which his current plan is credible and 
realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding 
debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment on such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Based on Applicant’s current income, his past conduct in agreeing to monthly 
payments on certain obligations, and his following through on those obligations, I 
believe he will address his outstanding obligations.  
 
Under AG & 20 (c) and & 20 (d), Applicant has paid or is paying eight of the 
sixteen obligations. He has not received any financial counseling, but listens to the 
financial counselors on the radio for advice on addressing his past-due obligations. He 
is living within his means, paying the debts he can, and no longer has the $300 monthly 
garnishment, which can now be used to address his remaining obligations. AG & 20 (c) 
and & 20 (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations.  
 
9 
 
 
 
Applicant’s past history of addressing his financial obligations since obtaining his 
current job in November 2009, support his stated intention to pay all of his debts. He 
has a plan and is working that plan. The plan does not address all of the SOR debts 
simultaneously, because he does not have sufficient income to do so. As debts are 
paid, he will begin paying others. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts 
are paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to 
hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2 (a)(1).) All of his financial obligations have not 
been paid, but he has progressed past the point of merely making promises to pay his 
debts and is making progress on addressing them.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Fnancial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
