 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05738 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sarah Kneisel, Esq. 
 
 
March 9, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
In January 2010 Applicant filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, listing $73,000 in 
creditors holding unsecured priority claims; $544,558 in unsecured nonpriority claims; 
and $5,905,968 in secured liabilities. The SOR alleged that he has an additional 
$3,095,379 in debts that were not included in the Chapter 11 filing. The bankruptcy is 
pending and the bankruptcy judge has not yet approved either the Disclosure Statement 
and/or the proposed Plan of Reorganization. Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 16, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 2011, scheduling the hearing for 
November 22, 2011. Applicant requested a continuance and the hearing was 
rescheduled to December 1, 2011. On December 1, 2011, the hearing was continued 
again, based upon a request by Applicant. It was scheduled for December 20, 2011, 
and convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which 
were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, and 
testified on his own behalf. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information until close of business December 28, 2011. Applicant submitted one packet 
of post-hearing exhibits, identified as AE A and AE O (AE A through F are duplicates of 
the exhibits identified as AE A through AE F, admitted at the hearing), which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 30, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, that Applicant has 
liabilities totaling $6,523,526, as listed in his January 11, 2010 Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
petition (including the debts listed in SOR 1.a.i-1.a.xxiii.). Additionally, it is alleged that 
he has an additional $3,095,379 in delinquent debts (as listed in SOR 1.b through 1.r) 
as identified in credit reports dated October 9, 2009; November 6, 2009; and May 24, 
2011. Applicant denied all of the allegations in his Answer. He asserted that he filed for 
Chapter 11 bankruptcy and had changed his spending habits. After considering the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony I make the following factual findings. (SOR; Answer; 
AE H; GE 5.) 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
Navy from 1980 to 2003. He achieved the rank of Lieutenant Commander. He held a 
clearance while in the Navy, without incident. From 2003 to at least 2008, he was 
employed as a lecturer at a post-graduate school. He has worked for a government 
contractor for the past three years. He has been married since 1986 and has four 
children, ages 16, 21, 22, and 23. (GE 1; AE B; Tr. 27-29, 65-66.) 
  
 During Applicant’s military service, he started accruing real estate holdings and 
other property. He made his first real estate purchase in 1997. As his family expanded, 
he bought a second home for his family and rented the first property out. He then 
moved to another state, and acquired a third property in the new state. His family 
continued to live in the second property. He also purchased a “super yacht” and lived on 
it for an undisclosed amount of time, while living in the second state. By the time he left 
active duty in 2003, he held these three properties. (GE 5; Tr. 66-71, 95-98, 142, 153.) 
 
 From 2003 to approximately 2007, Applicant acquired approximately seven 
additional properties, in addition to the three he already owned. However, he did not 
 
3 
 
own all these properties at the same time. He sold three to purchase a larger, more 
expensive home. He lived in approximately five of the homes for more than one year, 
each. He bought at least four homes as investment properties. He testified that he 
purchased the majority of the properties with 20% down payments and 30-year fixed 
interest rates, although he admitted that two of the purchases had non-traditional 
mortgages. Each property was purchased with the help of a broker. Applicant also 
utilized a real estate attorney and a certified public accountant to assist him in his real 
estate investments. He acknowledged that he “does not have a financial mind.” (GE 6; 
Tr. 47-53, 65-71, 78-81.) 
 
 In addition to the mortgages Applicant held, he also had consumer debt. 
Applicant and his wife were issued multiple credit cards with limits of up to $50,000. He 
also gave a $300,000 loan to a family member. (GE 6; Tr. 55, 133.) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant had a bank account at a credit union with a balance of several 
hundred thousand dollars. This account was Applicant’s reserve that he had set aside in 
case of financial difficulties. He also had a line of credit with the same credit union. In 
November of 2007, the credit union transferred the amount in Applicant’s bank account 
out of his account, and used it to repay the line of credit. As a result, Applicant found he 
was unable to meet his monthly mortgage obligations on all of his properties. Applicant 
requested the credit union return his funds, but his request was denied. He found 
himself unable to afford the payments on his properties without access to this money 
and he was not able to make his mortgage payments. At that time, Applicant estimated 
that he and his wife earned between $200,000 to $250,000 annually. (GE 6; AE J; AE L; 
Tr. 49-51, 134-136.) 
 
 He attempted to sell his rental properties. He successfully sold five of the 
properties for a profit, but as the economy worsened, he was unable to sell the 
remaining properties for more than the mortgage values on each property. He 
presented documentation establishing that he attempted to engage in short sales, and 
found four buyers for his four remaining properties. However, the bank did not accept 
the offers. He also attempted to get loan modifications, but was only successfully able to 
modify one mortgage. Applicant testified that he had between seven and eight 
properties foreclosed upon. (AE I; Tr. 43-45, 53-55, 129-133; 135-137.) 
 
 On January 11, 2010, Applicant filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, listing $73,000 
in creditors holding unsecured priority claims; $544,558 in unsecured nonpriority claims; 
and $5,905,968 in secured liabilities. The unsecured priority claims were composed of 
an unpaid $72,000 property tax bill and an additional $1,000 property tax liability owed 
to a county tax assessor and the state tax board, respectively. On November 15, 2011, 
Applicant submitted a reorganization plan to the bankruptcy court. Applicant files 
monthly disclosure statements with the bankruptcy court. As part of Applicant’s 
bankruptcy filing, he completed credit counseling on November 9, 2009. Applicant’s 
“Disclosure Statement” was set for hearing on February 3, 2012. (AE F; AE G; AE H.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney indicated in a December 28, 2011 letter: 
 
The essence of the Chapter 11 Plan provides for restructuring of certain of 
the secured debt, to include a request that the second mortgages on the 
real properties be “stripped.” The meaning of “lien stripping” is that [the 
attorney is] asking the judge to void the second liens and that they be 
classified as unsecured debt rather than secured debt. 
 
There is no certainty the bankruptcy judge will approve either the 
Disclosure Statement and/or the proposed Plan of Reorganization. In the 
event that the Court does not approve the Disclosure Statement and/or 
the proposed Plan of Reorganization, it is possible that the case may be 
converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. (AE N.)  
 
 Applicant introduced documentation explaining both Chapter 11 bankruptcy and 
the process of lien stripping. It explains that the bankruptcy creates tiers of creditors. 
Secured creditors are on the top tier and possibly receive payment in full, while 
unsecured creditors may only get a small percentage of the monies owed. In lien 
stripping, “The unsecured portion of the lien is ‘stripped’ from the collateral and the 
deficiency between the total debt owed and the collateral’s present value becomes an 
unsecured claim.” (AE I; AE O.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he currently owns three properties, which are all included 
in the bankruptcy filing. He estimates his personal residence is valued at between $1.5 
million to $1.9 million, but Applicant owes $3.36 million on the mortgage. He also 
currently owns a Piper Airplane, a super yacht (referenced above), two luxury cars, and 
a third vehicle. Applicant owes more on his loans he acquired for the purchases of the 
airplane, yacht, and luxury vehicles than each are worth. He has had two other luxury 
vehicles repossessed. Applicant also has a $193,139 income tax liability for December 
31, 2005, through December 31, 2009, owed to the IRS that he has listed in his Chapter 
11 filing. Applicant testified that he is disputing some of his tax obligations with the IRS. 
(GE 5; AE G; AE H; Tr. 86-89, 94-95, 100-107, 121-122.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on an account placed for collections by a boat store in the 
approximate amount of $2,177, as alleged in allegation 1.b. This creditor is identified on 
Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 
30-31.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on an account placed for collections by a 
telecommunications company in the approximate amount of $102, as alleged in 
allegation 1.c. This creditor is not identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix and does not 
appear to be part of Applicant’s Chapter 11. He testified that he will make sure this 
creditor is added to the bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 33.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account in the approximate amount of 
$686, as alleged in allegation 1.d. This debt was incurred when Applicant failed to return 
cable equipment. This creditor is not identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix and does 
 
5 
 
not appear to be part of Applicant’s Chapter 11. He testified that he will make sure this 
creditor is added to the bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 34.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a water bill in the approximate amount of $220, as 
alleged in allegation 1.e. This creditor is not identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix and 
does not appear to be part of Applicant’s Chapter 11. He testified that he will make sure 
this creditor is added to the bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 33-35, 45.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a gas bill in the approximate amount of $126, as alleged 
in allegation 1.f. This creditor is not identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix and does 
not appear to be part of Applicant’s Chapter 11. He testified that he will make sure this 
creditor is added to the bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 35, 45-46.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a cable company in the approximate amount of $186, as 
alleged in allegation 1.g. This creditor is not identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix and 
does not appear to be part of Applicant’s Chapter 11. He testified that he will make sure 
this creditor is added to the bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collections account in the approximate amount of 
$461, as alleged in allegation 1.h. Applicant testified that he has no recollection of this 
debt and contests its validity. However, he has not taken any steps to formally contest 
this debt. This creditor is not identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix and does not 
appear to be part of Applicant’s Chapter 11. He testified that he will make sure this 
creditor is added to the bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 36.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged off account in the approximate amount of 
$9,323, as alleged in allegation 1.i. This creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor 
Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 36.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged off account in the approximate amount of 
$61,446, as alleged in allegation 1.j. This creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor 
Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr.37.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged off account in the approximate amount of 
$61,446, as alleged in allegation 1.k. This creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor 
Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr.37.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged off home equity line of credit in the 
approximate amount of $460,943, as alleged in allegation 1.l. This creditor is identified 
on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. He 
testified that he expects this debt to be “stripped,” if his bankruptcy plan is approved. 
(AE H; Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 Applicant had a delinquent real estate loan in the approximate total amount of 
$400,000, as alleged in allegation 1.m. This property has been foreclosed upon. This 
creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 
bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 43.) 
 
6 
 
 Applicant had a delinquent real estate loan in the approximate total amount of 
$575,000, as alleged in allegation 1.n. This property was foreclosed upon. This creditor 
is identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
filing. (AE H; Tr. 44.) 
 
 Applicant had a delinquent real estate loan in the approximate total amount of 
$100,000, as alleged in allegation 1.o. This property has been foreclosed upon. This 
creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 
bankruptcy filing. (AE H.) 
 
 Applicant had a delinquent real estate loan in the approximate total amount of 
$429,278, as alleged in allegation 1.p. This property has been foreclosed upon. This 
creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 
bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 44.) 
 
 Applicant had a delinquent second mortgage in the approximate total amount of 
$168,985 as alleged in allegation 1.q. This property has been foreclosed upon. This 
creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 
bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 44.) 
 
 Applicant had a delinquent real estate loan in the approximate total amount of 
$825,000, as alleged in allegation 1.r. This property has been foreclosed upon. This 
creditor is identified on Applicant’s Creditor Matrix, which is part of his Chapter 11 
bankruptcy filing. (AE H; Tr. 44-45.) 
  
 Applicant currently earns a salary of approximately $142,000 per year. He also 
receives $3,000 per month in military retirement pay. His wife is currently on disability 
and does not plan to return to work. Applicant has $35,000 to $40,000 set aside to pay 
creditors as part of the bankruptcy reorganization plan. He indicated that he intends to 
stay within his means and not use credit cards again. (AE J; Tr.  61, 127, 146.) 
 
 Applicant has the support of his Congressman, a business partner, and a former 
fellow service member, who each wrote letters of support on Applicant’s behalf.  Among 
his awards and recognition for his distinguished service while in the Navy he received 
two Good Conduct medals; a Navy Commendation Medal; the Navy Achievement 
Medal; and six Sea Service Ribbons.  He also has been awarded a number of 
certificates, citations, and letters of appreciation highlighting his professional 
achievements and training. (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE J.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
7 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
8 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 Applicant accumulated millions of dollars in delinquent debts while earning a joint 
annual income of between $200,000 to $250,000 maximum. He has been unable or 
unwilling to pay his obligations since 2007. His delinquencies have been on-going for 
several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
9 
 
Applicant’s debt is extensive and on-going. He financed an unusually large 
amount of debt, which he now seeks to resolve through Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Even in 
the event Applicant’s Disclosure Statement and/or the proposed Plan of Reorganization 
are approved, and his debts are restructured, his unsecured creditors may only receive 
a small portion of what he actually owes them. Applicant did not exercise good 
judgment in financing so many properties, taking out large lines of credit, exhausting his 
credit cards, and making extravagant purchases like the super yacht, the airplane, and 
the luxury vehicles at the same time. He was living a life style which his income could 
not afford, by obtaining large amounts of credit. Not enough time has passed to predict 
whether Applicant will be able to live within his means on his current income. AG ¶ 20(a) 
is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partially caused by the economic downturn. 
However, his losses were enhanced by his poor judgment in acquiring an excessive 
amount of debt. He had no control over the weakening economy; however he should 
have exercised more prudence over his investment decisions. Further, to be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. With the Bankruptcy pending, I cannot hold Applicant has made a 
significant attempt to responsibly address his remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable. 
 
 Applicant attended pre-bankruptcy counseling. However, he has failed to show 
that his financial problems are under control. It would be premature to apply AG ¶ 20(c) 
without a sustained showing by Applicant that he can live within his means. 
 
 Applicant has applied for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Assuming his Disclosure 
Statement and/or the proposed Plan of Reorganization is approved, he will have a long 
period of repayment before his debts are resolved. While bankruptcy is a legal remedy, 
it is not a substitute for a track record of repayment. AG ¶ 20(d) is not mitigating. 
 
 Finally, Applicant has not formally contested any of his outstanding debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) cannot be fully applied. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant honorably served in the Navy for 23 years. He is well respected by his 
friends, colleagues, and fellow service members. Applicant’s financial situation was 
adversely affected by the economic downturn, which occurred after he had taken on 
large mortgages on numerous properties. However, there is little indication that he will 
regain financial stability in the near future. While he hopes to manage his debt through 
Chapter 11, the plan has not yet been approved. Moreover, he has not demonstrated he 
now has the restraint to limit his spending and stay within his means. There are 
significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Consideration security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.i.~1.a.xxiii:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
