 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-03552 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2011, and DOHA received his 
answer on September 23, 2011. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
November 17, 2011. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 2011. DOHA 
 
2 
 
 
issued a notice of hearing on December 2, 2011, scheduling the hearing for December 
14, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were received into evidence without objection, and 
he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until December 23, 2011, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant indicated by e-mail dated 
December 21, 2011, that he did not intent to submit additional documents. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 22, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old senior proposal specialist, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since March 2007. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. Applicant seeks a clearance to enhance his position within his company. 
(Tr. 46-47, 49-50, GE 1.) 
 
Applicant was awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science in May 
1988, and was awarded a Master’s Degree in marketing in November 1996. He has 
not served in the armed forces. (Tr. 47-49, GE 1.)  
 
Applicant has been married two times. His first marriage (W1) was from April 
1991 to June 1995, and his second marriage (W2) was from April 1996 to July 2005. 
Both marriages ended by divorce. Applicant has three sons – a 17-year-old who lives 
with W1 and a 14-year-old and a 10-year-old who live with W2. (Tr. 50-52, GE 1.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The Government’s Exhibits included Applicant’s November 2009 e-QIP, his 
responses to DOHA interrogatories in November 2010 and July 2011, as well as his 
December 2009 and March 2011 credit reports. Applicant’s SOR alleges five debts 
delinquent debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1e.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to: (1) costs associated with his 
separation and divorce from W2; (2) real estate loss associated with a condominium 
he owned; and (3) cost of relocating following an employment-related move. (Tr. 53-
57, 70.) 
 
3 
 
 
The following is a summary of Applicant’s SOR debts and their status: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1a, 1d, and 1e relate to the condominium referred to above. 
Specifically, the debts are a November 2010 $35,049 judgment filed by the second 
mortgage holder, a $13,678.78 collection account owed to the condominium 
association, and a $3,762.68 past-due debt owed to the local property taxing authority 
for tax years 2008 and 2009, respectively. Applicant purchased the condominium for 
$89,900 and it sold for $54,000 in foreclosure. Following foreclosure and on the advice 
of his attorney, Applicant is in a “wait and see mode” pending the final accounting of 
the foreclosure sale. None of these three creditors have approached Applicant since 
foreclosure. After receipt of the final accounting, Applicant’s attorney will make a 
recommendation whether to settle or file for bankruptcy. At present, Applicant is 
following his attorney’s advice. (Tr. 57-59, GE 2.) 
 
As soon as Applicant realized that he was having difficulty remaining current on 
the condominium payments and association fees, he tried the following options to 
avoid foreclosure: (1) offered to sign a deed in lieu of foreclosure, (2) attempted to 
secure a loan modification, and (3) attempted to sell the condominium by short sale. 
All of his efforts were unsuccessful. Applicant provided ample documentation of the 
foregoing options as well as his diligent and persistent efforts to deal with his creditors. 
(Tr. 73-75, GE 2, AE A - E.)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1b and 1c are credit card debts -- a $6,496 charged-off account and an 
$814 past-due account, respectively. As in the debts above, Applicant attempted to 
work with his creditors, but was unsuccessful. Since then, Applicant’s attorney 
counseled him to cease making payments on these accounts and to provide the 
creditors with the attorney’s contact information. Again, Applicant’s attorney will make 
a recommendation to Applicant whether to settle the debts or file for bankruptcy as 
soon as the foreclosure action is settled. (Tr. 59-61, GE 2.) 
 
Apart from these debts, Applicant has an excellent credit record. He owns two 
other properties and is current on the payments, taxes, and association fees for those 
properties. Additionally, he is current on his car payment, student loan, child support, 
and monthly living expenses. Applicant’s budget reflects a modest lifestyle and 
demonstrates that he lives within his means. (Tr. 61, 73-75, GE 4 – 5.) Apart from the 
advice he received from his attorney, Applicant did not seek formal financial 
counseling. He has money in the bank, owns a condominium near his place of 
employment, and has a net monthly remainder after all of his bills are paid exceeding 
$700. Applicant’s plan with regard to the debts alleged is to follow the advice of his 
attorney.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted a letter from his current employer indicating that he had 
received three recognition program awards in 2007, 2009, and 2011. His supervisor 
provided a very favorable recommendation letter that referenced Applicant’s above 
 
4 
 
 
average work performance and impeccable character. His supervisor strongly 
recommended Applicant for a security clearance. Lastly, Applicant submitted three 
years of employee performance appraisals that reflect sustained superior performance 
and document Applicant’s potential for future service as a defense contractor. (Tr. 75-
76, AE F.) Applicant is actively involved in the day-to-day lives of his two younger 
sons. He maintains a stable relationship with his fiancée and is an active runner and 
enjoys fishing. (Tr. 77-78.) 
 
Applicant’s former wife (W2) testified on his behalf. W2 stated that Applicant is 
an excellent father, pays for their two sons’ health insurance, and has never missed a 
child support payment. W2 noted that Applicant provided financial support for their 
children during difficult times, even to his detriment. She confirmed that their divorce 
was expensive for both of them and set them back financially. W2 stated that 
Applicant is “very conservative” with his finances. She also confirmed Applicant’s 
efforts to avoid foreclosure and deal with his debts. (Tr. 21-38.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable 
security decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
6 
 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant merits full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his separation and 
divorce and financial fallout were circumstances beyond his control and he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Even though he did not have the funds to 
remain current on his debts, he remained in contact with his creditors and took 
reasonable steps to resolve his debts.1
 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable even though Applicant did not seek formal 
financial counseling, apart from the financial counseling he received from his attorney. 
He has, however, produced evidence that reflects he is living within his means and 
has regained financial responsibility. His plan to await the final settlement of his 
condominium foreclosure is reasonable and based on the advice of his attorney. 
There are clear indications that his financial problems are in the process of being 
resolved. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish partial if not full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 Applicant attempted to work with his creditors 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
7 
 
 
throughout the process, but his efforts were unsuccessful. Given his financial situation, 
Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s service as a defense contractor employee and excellent 
employment record weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a 
productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within 
his means, and his SOR debts have been addressed insofar as he is following the 
advice of his attorney. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
The record is replete with Applicant’s good-faith efforts to work with his 
creditors throughout the entire process. Unfortunately for Applicant, his efforts were 
not successful. He is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His 
company fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. Due to 
circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite Applicant’s 
recent financial setback, it is clear from his actions that he has a plan to achieve full 
financial recovery. Apart from the debts alleged, Applicant is current on all of his other 
debts and lives within his means. During this entire process, he never fell behind on 
his other debts, his child support payments, and he never failed to meet the needs of 
his children. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s service as a defense 
contractor. I considered his years of financial responsibility before falling into debt. I 
considered his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his adverse situation, his responsibility to 
his children, his work performance evidence, and his testimony and demeanor. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant has fully mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a – 1e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
