1
   
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-08589
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
After a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I have questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, as he has not
mitigated the Government’s security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on January 21, 2010. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) that is undated, detailing security concerns under Guideline E
(Personal Conduct), and Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems), that
provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 27, 2011, and requested a
hearing on the record. The Government requested a hearing before an administrative
judge. I received the case assignment on February 21, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on February 24, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 15,
2012. The Government offered four exhibits marked as GE 1 through 4, which were
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He did not submit any
documents. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 23, 2012.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation in ¶ 1.b, and
denied the other allegations in the SOR. His admission is incorporated herein as a
finding of fact.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make
the following additional findings of fact. 
Applicant is 59 years old. He received his undergraduate degree in 1974.
Applicant earned a graduate certificate in August 2007. Applicant is married and has
two children. He has held a security clearance since 1994. Applicant has worked for his
current employer since 1994. (GE 1)
In 1999, Applicant used unclassified media in a classified computer system. He
disclosed this information in his 2010 security clearance application. Applicant stated
this was an isolated incident. He received a reprimand for the security violation. (GE 1;
Tr. 17) Applicant told the investigator in 2010 that he was originally told it was “ok” to
insert the unclassified disk into a classified computer. (GE 3)
Applicant acknowledged that as late as August 2009, he occasionally
downloaded software such as drivers, evaluation software, and programming tools, that
he would use when performing his engineering work. (GE 2) He stated that since 1994,
he has downloaded software that was not available on the company network to help
with his work approximately 30 to 40  times. In fact, Applicant answered “yes” to Section
27: Use of Information Technology, question (c) that he used hardware, software or
media in connection with any information technology system without authorization,
when specifically prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations. (GE 1) He
maintained that this was always on an unclassified system.
At the hearing, Applicant explained that he denied the allegation concerning the
downloading of unclassified information due to the wording of SOR allegation 1.a. He
believes he did not do so every month from 1994 until the present, but he admits there
were about 40 occasions. In his DOHA interrogatories he explained that he downloaded
software needed in order to do his engineering work on some jobs.  He downloaded
software that was not available on the work network. The software was needed to
operate laboratory hardware or to do data collection and analysis or research. (GE 2)
When questioned about the company policy, Applicant was vague. He knew
there was a policy and had also received emails concerning the policy. He admitted that
he violated company policy when he downloaded the software that was not available
3
through work. He said there was an understanding that he was not supposed to do that,
but other people did it. He stated that he did not always get explicit authorization, but on
a few occasions his manager told him to do it. (Tr. 23) He never had written permission,
but believed he had verbal authority a few times. 
Applicant testified that he knows the difference between using unclassified and
classified computer systems. He elaborated that he follows the rules on classified
systems. He stated there is always a systems administrator, if he has questions. He
also states that the fact that he has downloaded software on an unclassified system is
not a factor in denying him his clearance. (Tr. 10) However, at the hearing, Applicant
admitted that as late as 2009, he would download software and he understood that it
was something he was not supposed to do. (Tr. 54) He also acknowledged that he
never bothered to ask for clarification or guidance on this issue. (Tr. 55)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
4
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline M: Use of Information Technology Systems
AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information
technology systems:
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication,
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of
information.
AG ¶ 40 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and especially the following: (e) unauthorized use
of a government or other information technology system; (f) introduction, removal, or
duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any information
technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedure,
guidelines or regulations; and (g) negligence or lax security habits in handling
information technology that persist despite counseling by management.
Applicant admitted that from approximately 1994 until the present he downloaded
software, including drivers, programming tools and evaluation software approximately
30 to 40 times without following appropriate authorization procedures. He also received
a citation for a security violation in 1999 for using unclassified media in a classified
computer system. Applicant’s actions are a violation of the policies and regulations
regarding the misuse of government-issued information technology equipment. The
Government has established a prima facie case under Guideline M. 
5
AG ¶ 41 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily
available; and
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of
supervisor.
Applicant’s admitted 2009 instance of downloading software in an unclassified
system without appropriate authorization procedures is recent. Applicant does not
accept any responsibility for his actions. He knows he did not have authorization for the
many times (40) since 1994 that he downloaded the software. He states that it helped
his work, but he knew it was against policy. Applicant refers to the fact that other
engineers did the same thing. He admitted that he never actually checked the policy. He
has no insight into his behavior. He did not act reasonably under the circumstances. His
misconduct casts doubt on his current reliability. His conduct is not mitigated under AG
¶ 41(a), (b), or (c).
Guideline E: Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and especially the following:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
6
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and,
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources;
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group; and
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employee as a condition of employment.
Applicant violated the work policy by downloading software without appropriate
authorization from 1994 until the present. He also admitted to his 1999 security violation
in a classified system. He exercised poor judgment by not checking the policy or
obtaining express permission for each use. His behavior was not appropriate. Applicant
does not believe that his behavior should affect his ability to handle classified
7
information. He produced no documentation to show that he had guidance from any
manager or specific permissions for his actions.  AG ¶¶ 16(d) 2 and 16(d) 3 apply.
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant’s conduct is not mitigated. He violated policy for many years. He
acknowledged his behavior as late as 2009. He states that what he did by not getting
express authorization for downloading on an unclassified system has nothing to do with
his ability to handle classified information. He admitted a 1999 security violation. He has
shown poor judgment over many years. His serious misconduct casts doubt on his
reliability and trustworthiness. He has not mitigated the personal conduct concerns.  
8
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
has worked as an engineer for many years. He has held a security clearance since
1994. He obtained a graduate certificate in 2007.
Applicant admitted that he received a security citation in 1999. He is firm that this
was an isolated incident. However, from 1994 until the present, he has downloaded
software onto his unclassified system. He did this to help him with his work, but he
acknowledged that it was against policy. He does not believe that what he has done has
anything to do with handling classified information. He has not shown candor or
accepted responsibility for his behavior. This is serious and spans a long period.  He
has no insight into his behavior. He does not accept responsibility for the behavior.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his misuse of
information technoloy under Guideline M and his personal conduct under Guideline E.
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
