 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-01525 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Psychological Conditions concern. He suffered from three 
short-term bouts of depression in 2003, 2006, and 2009. He quickly overcame these 
bouts on his own and two were clearly related to outside stressors, including a divorce 
after 14 years of marriage. His depression is in remission and there is no indication of a 
current problem. He has properly handled classified information without issue since 
1997. His employer is aware of his depression and does not question his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his request for access to classified 
information due to the concern under Guideline I (Psychological Conditions).1 Applicant 
responded on August 12, 2011, and requested a hearing.  
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 30, 2011, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed with a hearing. After coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the 
hearing for November 17, 2011.2 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 in its case-in-chief. The exhibits were admitted into evidence 
without objection.3 Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through G, which were 
also admitted without objection. The Government did not call any witnesses. Applicant 
testified and called several witnesses, including an expert in the field of forensic 
psychiatry. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 29, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old analyst working for a federal contractor. He worked as 
a professional musician for several years after graduating high school and before going 
to college. He received his undergraduate and doctorate degrees in physics in 1987 and 
1996, respectively. He started working for his current employer in 1997. Applicant’s 
performance reports reveal that he consistently exceeds his employer’s expectations 
and has routinely received merit-based raises between five and fifteen percent. He was 
first granted a security clearance in 1997, and has never mishandled or otherwise 
compromised classified information.4  
 
Applicant’s current facility security officer (FSO) attested to the fact that he is a 
“security conscious employee,” who has prevented co-workers from committing security 
violations.5 Applicant’s former FSO, who has known him for over nine years, testified 
that Applicant would generally secure the sensitive compartmented information facility 
(SCIF) at the end of the work day, “locking up safes and ascertaining that the door was 
locked, setting alarms, and we never had any incidents.”6 He is described by a friend 
who has known him since they were in their early 20s as a “rock,” and by his former 
FSO as “conscientious” and “responsible.”7 
 
 Applicant has suffered from bouts of depression at various points in his life. His 
earliest recollection is from high school, when his girlfriend was killed in a car accident.8 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2
 I issued a prehearing order requiring the parties to “serve each other a copy of the exhibits they 
intended to offer” in advance of the hearing. Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3
 GE 6 – 8 were not admitted. See HE 2, Evidentiary Ruling. 
 
4
 Tr. at 142-144, 147; GE 1; GE 2; AE A; AE B. See also Answer. 
 
5
 Answer, Letter from FSO, dated August 12, 2011. See also Answer at 1; Tr. at 163-164. 
 
6
 Tr. at 114, 123-124. 
 
7
 Tr. at 117, 132. 
 
8
 Tr. at 165; Answer. See also Tr. at 105-108. 
 
3 
 
 
Over the past decade, Applicant has suffered from depression on three separate 
occasions. In 2003, after a recent divorce from his wife of 14 years and a move out-of-
state, Applicant “was feeling pretty down.” He had also recently purchased a three-
bedroom home that led to some “buyer’s remorse.” He went to see his general 
practitioner, who immediately gave him a starter sample of an anti-depressant 
medication. Applicant had serious side effects from the medication and stopped using it. 
He came out of the depression on his own.9 
 
 Applicant had no further issues with depression until about May 2006, when he 
was “feeling really down” and again went to see his general practitioner. The doctor 
prescribed anti-depressant medication, but it again had negative side effects. 
Applicant’s doctor also gave him the contact information for a mental health 
professional. Applicant did not follow-up with the referral, because during his prior 
background investigation the Government agent had chastised him for disclosing that 
he had sought marriage counseling. The agent told Applicant that mental health 
counseling “doesn’t look good,” and he was better off just speaking to friends about any 
mental or emotional issues. Applicant again overcame his depression without 
medication or professional help. His job did not suffer, as his performance reports notes 
he exceeded expectations and received a merit-based raise of over five percent.10 
 
 Applicant’s last bout with depression occurred in approximately May 2009. He 
had just “finished working on the main (classified) project” and was looking forward to 
returning to State A. At the request of his employer, he had delayed returning to State A 
for a year to finish the project. His employer then asked him to stay on to work on an 
unrelated, unclassified project. He stayed and found the work dissatisfying, because it 
did not relate to his field and other difficulties working in the unclassified arena. He was 
unhappy with his job and decided to take some time off from work to contemplate his 
future, without seeking prior approval for leave. He did not report to work for about two 
weeks. Applicant acknowledges that this was a poor decision on his part.  
 
Applicant’s supervisors contacted his former FSO, who contacted Applicant to 
find out how he was doing. It was decided that he would take some time off from work to 
allow him time to sell his house and transfer to State A, where his employer has its main 
offices. Applicant’s supervisors and former FSO did not question Applicant’s reliability 
as a result of this one lapse in judgment. He was not reprimanded or disciplined in any 
manner for this incident. He again quickly recovered from this last bout of depression. 
After selling his home, Applicant discovered that it had some environmental issues that 
he was previously unaware of that may have contributed to his depression. He has not 
suffered from depression since this last incident in 2009, even in the face of the difficult 
challenges that he has faced over the past three years.11 
                                                          
9
 Tr. at 145-147, 178-179, 184-187. See also Tr. at 22-27, 98-101. 
 
10
 Tr. at 150-151, 154-155, 187; AE B; Answer. See also GE 2; GE 3; AE E; Tr. at 22-27, 98-101. 
 
11
 Tr. at 151-153, 174, 187-190; GE 2; Answer. 
 
4 
 
 
 In October 2009, as part of his periodic reinvestigation, Applicant submitted his 
current security clearance application. He disclosed the treatment he received for 
depression from his general practitioner. In December 2009, he fully discussed the 
treatment and absence from work with a Government agent.12 
 
 In November 2010, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory that, in part, 
asked him to release his medical records. He voluntarily agreed to do so.13 He also 
agreed to undergo a psychological evaluation. In March 2011, Applicant met with Dr. M, 
a clinical psychologist, who conducted an evaluation that lasted approximately 45 
minutes. Dr. M spent a significant amount of time during the evaluation focused on 
Applicant’s shyness. Dr. M, who had supposedly reviewed Applicant’s records, was 
surprised when Applicant told him that he had been previously married.14 Dr. M 
diagnosed Applicant with major depressive disorder, which was recurrent based on “at 
least two major depressive episodes, the last one occurring in 2009.”15 Dr. M also 
diagnosed Applicant with a number of issues surrounding his shyness and 
uncomfortableness with his physical appearance.16 Dr. M found that Applicant’s 
“prognosis is guarded as major depressive episodes may reemerge in the future” and “if 
not treated may make him vulnerable to poor judgment.”17 Dr. M did not give an opinion 
as to whether Applicant’s condition affects his ability to safeguard classified information. 
 
 In November 2011, Applicant was re-evaluated by Dr. H, a forensic psychiatrist. 
Dr. H has years of training and practical experience in the field of psychiatry, including 
serving as chief of psychiatry and neurology for a large military installation. He was a 
professor of psychiatry for 30 years at a well-known university, and has been in private 
practice since 1979. He has conducted numerous fitness for duty evaluations.18 Dr. H 
reviewed Dr. M’s report, Applicant’s medical records, and other pertinent documents 
prior to Applicant’s evaluation. The evaluation lasted over two hours and focused on 
Applicant’s depression from his earliest childhood memories to the present.19 Dr. H 
                                                          
12
 GE 1; GE 2; Tr. at 179-180. 
 
13
 GE 2. 
 
14
 Tr. at 157-161, 179-183. 
 
15
 GE 4. But see Tr. at 46-49 (critique of Dr. M’s findings by Applicant’s expert). 
 
16
 Department Counsel stipulated that the only issue under Guideline I that the Government was 
concerned about was the diagnosis of major depressive disorder, not any other diagnoses or issues set 
forth in GE 4 and the SOR. Tr. at 54-55, 212. 
 
17
 GE 4.  
 
18
 Tr. at 19-21. Compare AE F (Dr. H’s CV), with, GE 5 (Dr. M’s CV, which notes he was licensed 
as a clinical psychologist less than a year before conducting the evaluation in this case).  
 
19
 Tr. at 22, 183; AE E. 
 
 
5 
 
 
testified and defended his opinion at hearing, including through the use of detailed notes 
that he kept and used to refresh his recollection of Applicant’s evaluation.20  
 
Dr. H also diagnosed Applicant with major depressive disorder but, in contrast to 
Dr. M, he found that the disorder was in remission. Dr. H also found, in contrast to Dr. 
M, that Applicant’s history supported a finding of only a single episode of major 
depression in 2006, because no outside factors caused Applicant’s depression. He 
further explained that Applicant’s sadness in 2003 and 2009 were triggered by, or were 
related to outside factors, divorce in 2003 and job dissatisfaction in 2009. He diagnosed 
these two incidents of sadness as an adjustment disorder with depressed mood. Dr. H 
noted that there is a possibility that Applicant would suffer a major depressive episode 
in the future. However, Dr. H testified that there are effective treatments for major 
depressive disorder, and he is confident Applicant would seek professional assistance if 
he were to have a relapse.21 Applicant candidly testified that he would seek professional 
help if he were to feel depressed in the future and follow the advice of the mental health 
professional.22 
 
Dr. H opined that Applicant is not currently depressed.23 He further opined to a 
“reasonable degree of medical certainty” that Applicant does not have a condition that 
indicates a defect in judgment, reliability, or ability to properly safeguard classified 
information.24 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
20
 Contrast with AE G (Dr. H had no notes or other records related to Applicant’s initial evaluation 
other than his two-page report).  
 
21
 Tr. at 22-39, 43-46, 51, 59-61, 70, 73, 98-105; AE E. 
 
22
 Tr. at 155-157, 162-163. 
 
23
 Tr. at 26-27, 33.  
 
24
 AE E, ¶ 5. See also Tr. at 26-27,  
 
 
6 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.25 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”26 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
 
 The security concern for Psychological Conditions is set out in AG ¶ 27: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
                                                          
25
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
26
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
7 
 
 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
 
 The guideline notes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 28: 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior;  
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and 
 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take 
prescribed medication. 
 
 Dr. M’s diagnosis that Applicant suffers from major depressive disorder and 
opinion that such condition may reemerge in the future, which may make Applicant 
vulnerable to poor judgment, establishes AG ¶ 28(b).27 However, I do not find that 
Applicant’s condition actually impairs his judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. More 
importantly, his condition does not impair his ability to properly safeguard classified 
information. His last episode of depression was in 2009 and it is in remission. He has 
handled classified information since 1997 without incident, including routinely securing a 
SCIF without issue. His security awareness has helped prevent the commission of 
security breaches by others. His work performance has been exemplary. No one at his 
work, to include his current and former FSOs, questions his judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; nor his ability to properly handle classified information.  
 
 In weighing the expert opinions of Dr. M and Dr. H, I gave more weight to Dr. H’s 
opinion. Dr. H’s opinion was fully consistent with the record evidence. He did not serve 
as the proverbial “hired gun.” Instead, he reviewed the evidence in the case, performed 
a full psychological evaluation, and then gave an unbiased diagnosis that Applicant 
suffered from major depressive disorder in remission. He went on to explain his 
diagnosis, as well as his opinion that Applicant’s condition did not impair his judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. Dr. H also fully explained his opinion that Applicant does 
not currently suffer from depression or other condition that could impact his ability to 
safeguard classified information. I found his testimony straightforward, credible, and 
consistent with the other facts adduced at hearing. 
                                                          
27
 Applicant’s decision not to go to work for about two weeks in 2009 is the type of irresponsible 
behavior exhibiting poor judgment encompassed by AG ¶ 28(a). However, I did not apply this 
disqualifying condition because this conduct was not alleged in the SOR. I have considered it in 
assessing Applicant’s case in mitigation. See generally ISCR Case No. 10-00922 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 
2011) (“It is appropriate for a Judge to consider conduct and matters not alleged in the SOR for such 
limited purposes as evaluating a claim of extenuation, mitigation or changed circumstances, and when 
weighing relevant and material information under the whole person concept.”). 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s failure to take the medication prescribed by his general practitioner – 
albeit understandable in light of the negative side effects – raises AG ¶ 28(c).  
 
 As Applicant’s history of depression raises a concern under Guideline I, he bears 
the burden of mitigating the concern. Under AG ¶ 29 the following mitigating conditions 
were potentially raised by the evidence and warrant further discussion: 
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;  
 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one 
caused by a death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been 
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional 
instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
 Dr. H testified that Applicant’s condition is readily controllable with effective 
treatment, and Applicant candidly testified that he would follow the advice of a mental 
health profession if he were to feel depressed in the future. However, Applicant’s past 
history of not following through with the medical advice of his doctors undercuts to a 
certain degree the application of AG ¶ 29(a) in this case. 
 
 Similarly, AG ¶ 29(b) is not fully applicable in this case. Although the Government 
stipulated that Dr. H was an expert in the field of forensic psychiatry and he 
persuasively opined that Applicant’s condition is in remission, he was not employed or 
approved by the Government and conceded that there was a possibility that Applicant’s 
condition could recur in the future.  
 
 Applicant’s depression in 2003 and 2009 were caused by temporary, external 
stressors that have since passed, and Applicant no longer shows any sign of emotional 
or mental instability. Although Applicant’s depression in 2003 and 2009 were due to 
temporary, external stressors, such does not make it any less disconcerting from a 
security perspective than his depressive episode in 2006. However, all three bouts of 
depression were short lived and Applicant was able to overcome them. Applicant’s 
depression has never once affected his ability to handle or properly safeguard classified 
information. His depression is in remission and there is no indication of a current 
problem. More importantly, through this process, Applicant now realizes that if he is 
faced with a bout of depression in the future that he can safely seek appropriate help 
 
9 
 
 
and will do so. AG ¶ 29(d) and (e) apply. Applicant met his burden of persuasion and 
mitigated the psychological conditions concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).28 I incorporate my Guideline I analysis herein and note 
some additional whole-person factors. Although Applicant was concerned about seeking 
mental health counseling due to the incorrect advice he previously received, he has 
been candid about his condition and the medical help he sought to treat it from the 
outset of his reinvestigation. He has voluntarily turned over his medical records and 
subjected himself to two separate psychological examinations due to concerns raised 
by his history of depression. This is the type of honesty and level of cooperation one 
would expect of an individual entrusted with this nation’s secrets.  
 
 I had an opportunity to observe Applicant’s demeanor as he testified and asked 
him questions. I found him credible. This finding is wholly consistent with those who 
have known him for years and attest to his reliability, trustworthiness, and honesty. 
Applicant now recognizes that seeking help for a mental health issue does not preclude 
an individual from being granted a security clearance and, in light of his testimony and 
honesty throughout the process, I have full faith that he would seek appropriate help if 
needed in the future.  
 
 Applicant’s depression has never once affected his ability to properly safeguard 
classified information. Security clearance adjudications are predicative judgments, 
where an applicant’s past history is the best indicator of future conduct. Although 
Applicant has periodically suffered from depression, he established that he has a history 
of properly safeguarding classified information and there is no reason to doubt his ability 
to do so going forward. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I (Psychological Conditions):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        For Applicant 
                                                          
28
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
