 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 10-04893                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [redacted], Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                                   Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on December 9, 
2009. On October 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On November 10, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
November 29, 2011. I convened a hearing on January 11, 2012, to consider whether it 
 
2 
 
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 6 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant 
testified and called two witnesses. He introduced eight exhibits, which were identified 
and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through H and entered in the record without objection. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until January 23, 2012, so that 
Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional information on the payment of his 
delinquent debts. Applicant timely filed a 12-page exhibit. Department Counsel did not 
object to Applicant’s submission and summarized its conclusions in a document which I 
have identified as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. I marked Applicant’s post-hearing submission 
as Ex. I and entered it in the record. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 18, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains nine allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 18, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.). In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all nine allegations, totaling $27,833. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant, who is 32 years old, was born, raised, and educated through the ninth 
grade in Vietnam.1 He immigrated to the United States in 1999, and soon thereafter, 
began work as an hourly employee with his present employer, a government contractor. 
The president and chief executive officer of the company, which has employed 
Applicant for the past 12 years, appeared as his personal representative and as a 
witness. He described Applicant as a “stellar employee.” (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 67.) 
 
 Applicant’s job responsibilities include carrying out actions that convert 
information on paper documents from physical data to digital data. He was first granted 
a security clearance in 2006. (Ex. 1; Tr. 65-67.) 
  
 Applicant was married in Vietnam in 2009. He and his wife share living quarters 
and living expenses with his mother, sister, and brother. Applicant’s wife, mother, and 
brother also work for the government contractor which employs Applicant. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; 
Tr. 109-110.)  
 
 Applicant has a limited command of English. During his background investigation 
in January 2010, Applicant brought along his sister and asked if she might serve as his 
translator during the interview. During the interview, Applicant reported that he spent 
most of his social time with other family members and had only two friends outside of 
his family circle. (Ex. 2; Tr. 90, 95, 98.) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant began to acquire and use credit cards. For a while, he made 
only the minimum payments on the monthly charges he received from the credit card 
                                            
1  At his hearing, Applicant stated that he had a high school education in Vietnam. (Ex. 2; Tr. 91-92.)  
 
3 
 
 
companies. Over time, Applicant’s credit card debts grew. When he did not pay the 
debts, they were referred for collection. (Tr. 94-97.) 
 
 During his interview, Applicant told the investigator he did not recognize the 
debts. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he did not understand the investigator’s 
questions. (Ex. 2; Tr. 97-98.) 
 
 Later in May 2011, when Applicant received DOHA’s interrogatories about his 
financial delinquencies, he realized he had a serious problem. He sought help from his 
company’s facility security officer and human resources manager in addressing his 
debts. The company, including the president, mobilized to assist Applicant in finding a 
reliable debt management organization to help him identify his creditors and set up a 
payment plan to satisfy his debts. The president and chief executive officer of the 
company also stated: 
 
[The Company] is going to be involved in this situation until it’s resolved. 
So, we not going to just say, [Applicant], we’re going to set up the plan 
and now you’re done.    
 
We have an interest. [Applicant has] been a stellar employee for all these 
years. You’ll hear that in other testimony. And we have an interest in 
making sure that his mistakes, and everyone hopefully understands that 
people do make mistakes, have been one[-]time mistakes. We have a 
plan, [the debts] will be resolved, and the company is behind him to make 
sure that he follows through.  (Ex. D; Tr. 48-50.) 
 
 In May 2011, Applicant entered into a contract with a debt management firm to 
pay his delinquent debts. He initially agreed to pay $732 monthly to the debt 
management firm for disbursement to his creditors. However, Applicant’s payment 
records show that he actually disburses $872 each month for payment to his creditors. 
(Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. D.) 
 
 Applicant’s hourly wage is $18.35 for 40 hours of work a week. If he works more 
than 40 hours a week, his hourly wage is 1.5 times $18.35. In November 2011, 
Applicant received a cash bonus of $500 for exceptional work on a federal project. In 
November 2011, Applicant received another cash bonus of $1,500 for excellent 
performance on another federal project. His 2011 gross income was approximately 
$51,362. (Ex. F; Tr. 69-70, 78-80.) 
 
 Applicant provided a monthly budget2 which showed a gross monthly income of 
$4,567. His combined monthly federal, state, and local taxes were $427. Total 
expenses for health care were $82. (Ex. E.) 
 
                                            
2 For clarity, the amounts identified in Applicant’s budget are rounded to the nearest whole dollar.  
 
4 
 
 
 Additionally, Applicant listed his share of home expenses, including rent, utilities, 
telephone, cable, and Internet services, as $470. He reported the following monthly 
living expenses: $150, groceries; $50, personal supplies; clothing, $100; dining out, 
$50; barber, $15. Applicant listed transportation expenses of $105. He saves $200 each 
month in his retirement account, and he pays $872 each month to his debt management 
firm. Applicant’s net remainder each month is $2,046. (Ex. E.) 
 
 Applicant reported that he has a balance of $13,000 in his retirement plan 
account. He also has a balance of $7,000 in his checking account. (Tr. 103-104.)  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor since 1999 testified that Applicant’s performance has 
always been “very, very good.” She also stated that Applicant was dependable and so 
trustworthy that she sent him on out-of-state assignments that required transportation of 
classified information. She also reported that their federal agency customers praised 
Applicant’s professionalism. (Tr. 78-80.) 
 
 Applicant’s most recent performance evaluation rated his performance in job 
knowledge, quality of work, and quantity of work as “commendable” or seven on a ten-
point rating scale. His dependability and customer service performance were rated as 
“proficient” or six, and his communication skills were rated as “competent” or five. (Ex. 
G.) 
 
 In a post-hearing submission, Applicant provided documentation establishing that 
the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.d., and 1.i. referred to only one debt, and that debt had 
been satisfied. Applicant’s documentation also established that the allegations at SOR 
¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.f., and 1.g reflected debts that were being paid under the payment plan  
with the debt management firm. Additionally, Applicant’s documentation established that 
the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.h. had been paid. (Ex. I; HE 1.) 
 
                                                             Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
 
5 
 
 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties that began in at least 2003, 
when he acquired credit cards and accumulated debts he did not pay. Applicant has 
been steadily employed since 1999.  
 
Applicant’s debts arose in 2003, when he was in his early 20s and a newly-
arrived immigrant. Since then, he has matured, married, and demonstrated diligence, 
reliability, and responsibility in his work. The record suggests that Applicant’s limitations 
with the English language may have impeded his awareness of his financial 
delinquencies in the past. When he learned of his indebtedness from DOHA 
interrogatories in May 2011, he sought help from his company’s facility security officer 
and human resources manager. They, and the company president, helped Applicant 
identify a responsible debt management firm. Applicant contracted with the firm and, 
 
7 
 
 
and since May 2011, he has committed over $800 each month to satisfying his 
delinquent debts. In a post-hearing submission, he provided documentation that all of 
the debts alleged on the SOR had been paid or were in repayment status. 
 
While it is true that not all of Applicant’s delinquent debts have been fully 
satisfied, DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained that an individual’s good-faith partial 
payment of debts need not be a bar to access to classified information: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a 
serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008.) 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009.) 
 
 Applicant has acted responsibly and set up a reasonable plan for repaying his 
delinquent debts. By his actions, he has demonstrated that he is serious about following 
that plan and resolving his delinquent debts. While AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(e) do not apply 
to the facts of Applicant’s case, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are 
applicable in mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 32 
 
8 
 
 
years. He is a valued employee who has worked for the same employer for 12 years, 
ever since immigrating to the United States from Vietnam. His financial problems began 
in 2003, when he acquired credit cards and accumulated more debt than he knew how 
to satisfy. Applicant has an employer and a management team that actively worked to 
assist him in developing a plan to identify and satisfy his financial delinquencies. 
Applicant has followed that plan, and he is systematically and responsibly paying his 
financial delinquencies. 
 
 The president of his company appeared as Applicant’s personal representative 
and expressed his willingness to stand behind Applicant until he paid off his delinquent 
debts. Applicant is indeed fortunate to have such positive support and understanding 
from his employer. 
 
Overall, the record evidence persuades me that Applicant is mature, trustworthy, 
and capable of being entrusted with access to classified information. I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                        Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR  APPLICANT 
 
             Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.i.:            For Applicant 
   
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
