KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had consumed alcohol at times to
excess and to the point of intoxication from approximately 1975 to at least may 2010 and had
been arrested and prosecuted on multiple occasions for DWI.  The Judge reasonably explained
why the mitigating evidence was insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 10-07310.a1
DATE: 03/30/2012
DATE: March 30, 2012
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-07310
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 25, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 30, 2011, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge David M. White denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.
Applicant seeks reversal of the Judge’s adverse decision arguing essentially that the evidence
demonstrates that Applicant has mitigated the government’s security concerns.  In support of his
argument, he presents a detailed summary of the evidence presented at the hearing—emphasizing
what he has learned from his experience, and the fact that he attended counseling and received a
favorable assessment. He also submits a statement about changes in his situation subsequent to the
hearing, which the Board cannot consider on appeal. See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant’s
presentation does not demonstrate that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to
law.
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of
fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence
outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-04042 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct.
4, 2011).
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had consumed alcohol at
times in excess and to the point of intoxication from approximately 1975 to at least May 2010,  and
had been arrested and prosecuted on multiple occasions for Driving Under the Influence between
1983 and 2005.  In the 2005 incident, which resulted in two felony charges, Applicant had been
driving with a Blood Alcohol Content of more than twice the legal limit and had hit a stopped
motorcycle.  In an incident  in 2009, Applicant had become intoxicated and disruptive on an airplane
and had to be escorted off the plane by airport police.  Decision at 2-5, and 7.  The Judge also made
sustainable findings that Applicant had deliberately omitted information of security significance
from his security clearance application. Id. at 5 and 9.  These incidents were sufficient to establish
the government’s security concerns under Guidelines G and E, and to shift the burden of mitigation
to Applicant. 
A review of the decision indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered
by Applicant, including his participation in counseling and his favorable work performance, against
the length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant conditions and factors.  Id. at 7-10.  The Judge reasonably explained why the mitigating
3
evidence was insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns—noting in particular that
Applicant had resumed drinking after completion of alcohol treatment in 1999, had provided no
current favorable prognosis by a qualified medical professional, including the counselor he saw for
four sessions in 2011, and that Applicant’s August 2011 assessment of “Insufficient Evidence of
Abuse/Dependence” was based on his self-report of only about half of his history of alcohol-related
incidents.  Id. at 8.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan     
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Willaim S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
