1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-03711
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Janiffer Pearce, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on December 9, 2009. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 11, 2011, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on June 2, 2011. He answered the SOR on August
1, 2011. Applicant retained counsel, and he requested a hearing before an
Applicant’s counsel marked Applicant’s post-hearing submissions as AE AA through AE OO, rather than1
following the hearing exhibits sequentially. This numbering has been retained for consistency in the records
of all parties. The record does not contain exhibits from Applicant marked as AE S through AE Z.
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient2
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
administrative judge. DOHA received the request, and Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on December 1, 2011. I received the case assignment on
December 12, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 30, 2011, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on January 24, 2012. The Government offered
exhibits marked as GE 1 through GE 6, which were received and admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. He submitted exhibits marked as
AE A through AE R, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 2, 2012. I held the record open
until February 24, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely
submitted AE AA - AE OO,  without objection. The record closed on February 24, 2012.1
Procedural Ruling
Notice
Applicant was advised of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the
notice 15 days before the hearing. Through counsel, Applicant affirmatively waived his
right to the 15-day notice. (Tr. 11)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c,
and 1.d. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f of the SOR.  He also provided additional2
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 47 years old, works as an engineer for a Department of
Defense contractor. He began working for his employer in June 1996. His performance
evaluations reflect a high level of skills and confidence from his managers. His
GE 1; AE R; Tr. 69-70.3
GE 1; Tr. 86.4
AE DD; Tr. 27-29, 35-36, 52-53, 71-73, 95-96.5
AE AA - AE CC; Tr. 27-29, 35-36, 52-53, 71-73, 95-96.6
Tr. 28, 49-50.7
3
managers praise his team leadership as a project manager. He is well-respected by his
customer, his co-workers and his managers.3
Applicant graduated from college in 1990 with a bachelor’s degree. He married in
1985. He and his wife have a 25-year-old daughter and 22-year-old son. His son
attends college, and he provides help with tuition costs.4
In December 2001, Applicant and his wife formed a real estate investment
Limited Liability Company (LLC 1) in the state in which they live. LLC 1's Articles of
Incorporation do not identify any corporate officers; rather the Articles identify Applicant
and his wife as the only members of LLC 1. This company is still active. His wife
performed, and still performs, all the day-to-day operations of this company. Applicant
did not involve himself in the company’s operations.5
In December 2004, Applicant and his wife formed a second real estate
investment Limited Liability Company (LLC 2) in the state in which they live. The Articles
of Incorporation identify Applicant as the President, Vice President/CFO and Treasurer
and his wife as the Secretary of the corporation. On January 3, 2005, by corporate
resolution, Applicant, in his capacity as the President of the corporation, authorized his
wife, the Secretary, to act on behalf of the corporation. Between January 2005 and the
dissolution of this company in 2010, Applicant’s wife performed all the day-to-day
operations of the company. Applicant did not involve himself in the company’s
operations or business decisions.6
LLC1 and LLC 2 purchased foreclosed real estate property around the country.
Between 2002 and 2010, the companies purchased between 30 and 50 properties. The
companies paid for some of the properties outright and for some by obtaining a
mortgage. After purchasing the properties, the companies would rehabilitate the
properties. In some situations, the companies would help the owner return to the
property after improving their finances. Applicant’s wife used lines of credit and credit
cards to finance the repairs and pay other expenses related to the properties. The
companies derived income from sales or rent of its properties. In 2007, Applicant’s wife
began to notice a tightening of the mortgage lending market. The companies, through
his wife, started selling property and reducing inventory.7
By 2008, the real estate business had slowed significantly, which impacted sales
and rental income for the companies and made it difficult for the companies to repair the
AE HH; AE II; AE MM - AE OO; Tr. 27, 30, 49-51, 55-56.8
AE GG; Tr. 23-24.9
Upon a successful completion of a business Chapter 7 bankruptcy, the case filing is shown as “terminated,”10
not “discharged” as in an individual Chapter 7 bankruptcy. AE B.
AE B; AE I; AE GG, AE HH; Tr. 23-25, 45-47, 84, 109.11
4
houses it owned or rent the property. LLC 2 purchased one property through the
assignment of the mortgage note after the owner died. LLC 2 paid $10,000 for this
property based on a value of approximately $70,000. At the time of purchase, the
property and mortgage were part of the owner’s estate and in the probate process,
which limited the actions of LLC 2. During probate, the family decided it did not want the
property returned to them. At some point, someone stripped and vandalized the
property, which decreased its value to less than $10,000. Under the city laws where this
property was located, the vandalized property violated the housing laws. The City
moved to enforce its laws by requiring the property owner repair the property. When
LLC 2 did not repair the property because it did not have any funds, the City charged
the company with criminal misconduct and fined it $6,000. LLC 2 did not pay the fine or
the nearly $6,000 in demolition costs on this property. LLC 2 no longer owns this
property nor does it owe taxes on this property. The City closed its case against LLC 2,
after the company pled guilty to the code violations in November 2009.  8
When Applicant’s wife learned about the criminal charge and fine, she initially
tried to work with the city to resolve the repair issues and the fine, without success. She
also attempted to sell the property, but did not find a buyer in 2009.  Finally, she sought
legal advice. The company’s legal counsel in the City advised Applicant’s wife that LLC
2 should consult a bankruptcy attorney about the company filing bankruptcy as a way to
reduce Applicant and his wife’s personal liability for the fine imposed on the company
because the housing violations are strict liability offenses for which a corporate officer
could be punished criminally.  9
LLC 2, through Applicant’s wife, sought a legal opinion regarding the company
filing bankruptcy. Based on its attorney’s advice and lack of funds to pay the fine, LLC 2
filed for bankruptcy in March 2010. Applicant’s wife met with the attorney and helped
prepare the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant’s wife provided him with the completed
petition and discussed LLC 2's debts with him. After reviewing the petition and
discussing it with his wife, Applicant signed the petition as president of LLC 2. At the
completion of the bankruptcy process in July 2010, all assets of LLC 2 were liquidated
by the bankruptcy trustee, and the company dissolved. The bankruptcy court records
indicated that his bankruptcy case is “terminated” and noted that discharge did not
apply.  LLC 2's bankruptcy petition listed five debts totaling $44,665, including the fines10
imposed by the City, and no assets.11
The SOR identifies six debts, totaling approximately $88,000. All of these debts
are related to the business operations of LLC 2. The $18,500 credit card debt identified
SOR; AE A; AE I. For the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant provided documentation which reflects that the 12-digit12
account number identified on the December 2009 credit report and the four-digit account number identified
in the bankruptcy petition are the same debt. GE 2; AE I; AE LL. 
GE 5; AE A; AE K; Tr. 41, 45.13
AE C - AE E; Tr. 34-35, 38-40.14
AE C; AE F; AE O; Tr. 37-38, 93-94.15
Two months a year, Applicant receives an extra paycheck, which is not calculated into his monthly income.16
5
in SOR ¶ 1.a; the $6,900 credit card debt identified in SOR ¶ 1.b; and the $1,394 past-
due credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.f are three of the five debts listed on LLC 2's bankruptcy
petition. These debts are resolved.12
Concerning the $56,235 real estate debt identified in SOR ¶ 1.e, LLC 2
attempted to sell this property. LLC 2 received several offers on the property, which the
mortgage company rejected. Applicant and his wife, whose names were on the
mortgage, then signed a Deed in Lieu of foreclosure on this property, which transferred
ownership of the property to the mortgage company in October 2010. Applicant
provided documentation from the mortgage company showing that this mortgage had
been released. Applicant has resolved this debt.13
Applicant acknowledged personal responsibility for the two debts of LLC 2
identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($25,315) and 1.d ($27,769), as he personally guaranteed the
payment of these debts when he and his wife opened the accounts several years before
they started the LLCs. The companies used these cards for business purchases. When
the company’s’ financial problems first began, Applicant’s wife contacted the creditor for
both debts and attempted to negotiate a settlement of the debts, without success. In
July 2011, Applicant and his wife retained the services of a credit repair company to
help with the resolution of these debts. The credit repair company successfully
negotiated a settlement of the 1.d debt. Applicant fully resolved this debt in October
2011.  14
After Applicant’s wife attempted to negotiate a settlement with the creditor in
SOR ¶ 1.c, the creditor holding the debt filed a lawsuit against Applicant and his wife.
They are defending the lawsuit. As of the hearing, Applicant and his wife had responded
to the discovery requests of the creditor; however, they had not received from the
creditor its responses to their discovery requests. Once they receive these documents,
Applicant and his wife plan to make a settlement offer in this case. Applicant has set
aside $4,000 towards their settlement offer. He is also prepared to make monthly
payments.15
Applicant currently earns $4,191 in bi-weekly gross income and $2,922 in bi-
weekly net income for a monthly net income of $5,844.  His wife earns approximately16
$1,200 a month from her business. His monthly expenses include $936 for the
GE 5; AE EE; AE FF; Tr. 21, 107. Applicant’s wife anticipated substantial income in 2011, but did not receive17
this income. AE G; Tr. 21-22.
Tr. 59, 64-65.18
AE J; Tr. 47, 108.19
6
mortgage, $597 for a home equity loan, $832 for car payments, $100 for credit card
payments, $336 for property taxes, $344 for utilities, and other usual living expenses of
approximately $2,800. His living expenses total approximately $5,945, leaving about
$1,100 for debt reduction and unanticipated expenses each month. Applicant is current
on his personal expenses.17
LLC 1 continues to operate and currently owns three properties without any
mortgage debt. One property is for sale, and a second property has a sales offer of
$100,000. At the time of the hearing, LLC 1 was waiting for the buyer to receive the
funds for closing. The third property has been vandalized. Once the insurance company
received all the repair estimates and issues a check, the property will be repaired and
then rented. LLC 1 has unsecured debts between $60,000 and $70,000, a secured debt
(a second mortgage on their house, which is paid each month) of $200,000, and
accounts receivable of $125,000. Applicant’s wife anticipates applying the sales
proceeds from the sale of LLC 1’s property to its debts. Their personal finances are
fine.18
Applicant and his wife testified credibly about the ownership and operation of the
two businesses they own. His wife operated the business day to day. His involvement
was much more limited, as he worked full time at his current job. He occasionally
discussed some business issues with his wife and occasionally signed documents in his
corporate capacity. His limited involvement in the daily business operations provided
him with little understanding of the operations of his business. Applicant and his wife
received credit counseling.19
LEGAL ISSUE
Applicant and his wife formed two Limited Liability Companies (LLC) in their
place of residence. Under state law, members or officers of a LLC are not personally
liable for the debts of a LLC. Specifically, the controlling state statue, Revised Statute ¶
29-651, reads as follows:
Except as provided in this chapter, a member, manager, employee, officer
or agent of a limited liability company is not liable, solely by reason of
being a member, manager, employee, officer or agent, for the debts,
obligations and liabilities of the limited liability company whether arising in
contract or tort, under a judgment, decree or order of a court or otherwise.
Post-hearing briefs filed by the parties.20
7
Liability for any debts of a corporation for which a member or an officer has personally
guaranteed payment of the debt attaches as a personal debt of the member or officer.
Debts incurred by the corporation on behalf of the corporation by its officers or members
does not become the person debt of the member or officer.20
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
8
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
When mortgage credit tightened and the real estate market severely declined
because of the economic downturn starting in 2007, Appellant developed significant
financial problems directly related to the real estate investment business his wife
operated. As a result, he incurred unpaid debts. These two disqualifying conditions
apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
9
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
Applicant’s wife decided to start a real estate investment business in 2001. She
opened their first limited liability company in 2001, and their second limited liability
company in 2004. Applicant’s wife ran the day-to-day operations of both companies.
She made the decisions on which properties to buy, what repairs to make, or whether to
sell or rent. She obtained the necessary financing to operate the companies. Applicant
worked at his engineering job and had little involvement in the companies. Both
companies purchased investment real property. After rehabilitating the property, the
companies either sold or rented the property. The companies operated successfully and
profitably until the economy started to change in 2007. The rapid decline of the
economy in 2007 and 2008 directly impacted their real estate investment business. The
companies’ property values declined significantly as did rental income. This resulted in a
serious decline in cash flow to the companies for repairs to the properties and debt
10
payment. Vandals stripped and damaged one property, a factor beyond their control.
The decline in the real estate market is a factor beyond the control of Applicant and his
wife. When his wife realized the problems, she, in her capacity as an officer of LLC 2
with authority to act on behalf of LLC 2, started selling properties and eliminating debts.
She contacted two credit card companies in an attempt to work a resolution to the
debts, as did Applicant. When one mortgage company refused to work with LLC 2 and
them on the sale of a property, they transferred ownership of the property to the
mortgage company by a Deed in Lieu, which the mortgage company accepted as a
method for resolving their mortgage debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. Given the real estate market at
this time, Applicant’s wife, in her corporate capacity, acted reasonably under the
circumstances in which their companies operated. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.
The loss of income from the economic decline directly impacted LLC 2's ability to
repair property, which had been vandalized and stripped by unknown persons. As a
result, the City, where the property was located, fined LLC 2 for failing to repair the
property and entered a finding of guilty against LLC 2. The City never transferred any
criminal liability for the failure of LLC 2 to repair this property to Applicant or his spouse.
The City closed its case against the LLC 2 in late 2009. Because of these fines, LLC 2
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on the recommendation of two lawyers. The bankruptcy
terminated LLC 2, which eliminated its debts, including the fine. As a result, the debts in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e are resolved. When LLC 2 filed for bankruptcy, Applicant and
his wife took a credit counseling class. AG ¶ 20(c) applies.
Applicant and his wife contacted the creditor for the two bank card debts in SOR
¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. Despite their efforts, the creditor refused to work out a settlement plan
with them. They then hired a credit repair company, who successfully resolved one of
the debts with this creditor. Applicant and his wife acted in good faith by contacting the
creditor to settle their debts. One debt remains unpaid as the creditor chose to file a
lawsuit, rather than settle the debt. Applicant has money reserved to pay this debt and
is willing to establish a payment plan as part of a settlement, once the creditor is willing
to discuss settlement with him. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these two debts.  AG ¶ 20(a) is not
applicable in this case.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
11
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Under state
law, liability for the debts of a LLC do not transfer to the officers or the members of the
LLC unless an officer or a member personally guarantees payment of the debt.
Applicant’s wife successfully operated their two LLCs until the economy began a
downward spiral in 2007. His wife divested many of the properties owned by the LLCs
and attempted to resolve debts. Eventually, LLC 2 filed a corporate bankruptcy which
terminated the company and eliminated its debts, which included three SOR debts. LLC
1 continues to operate without impacting Applicant’s finances. During all this time,
Applicant paid all his personal monthly expenses. None of the debts in the SOR relate
to his personal living expenses, which shows a track record for paying debts. His
monthly income is more than sufficient to pay his monthly household expenses.
Applicant and his wife credibly testified about his lack of involvement in the day-
to-day operations of both LLCs, which is supported by the corporate resolution
authorizing her to act on behalf of LLC 2. When it came time to file the bankruptcy
petition, Applicant, as the President of LLC 2, is the proper corporate officer to sign the
petition. The fact that he signed this petition does not make him an active participant in
the day-to-day operations of the company. He did not make the decisions about the
purchases and sales of real estate by either LLC or the actual funding of the companies.
Both companies operated successfully until the economy declined. The decline in the
economy and resulting financial difficulties for the companies does not reflect negatively
on his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. In this case, Applicant’s wife has taken
multiple steps to limit the liabilities of the LLCs and pay its debts. 
The Government argues that the potential personal liability for the LLC 2's liability
and fines for housing code violations reflects the Applicant’s poor judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness. The City criminally charged LLC 2, and LLC 2 pled guilty, but coud
not pay the fine. By operation of law, the City may transfer LLC 2's lliability and fine to
its corporate officers as individual persons. In LLC 2's case, the City closed its case and
12
chose not pursue further legal action against Applicant and his wife. The damage to the
property in question occurred because of the conduct of others, not because of the
conduct of Applicant and his wife or LLC 2. The economic downturn depleted corporate
funds, making it impossible for LLC 2 to repair the damaged property. His wife
unsuccessfully attempted to work with the City on this, then they followed legal advice to
file corporate bankruptcy to eliminate further problems with the fines for them
personally, as the LLC 2 owned the property. The damage and lack of funds was
beyond their control. Given the circumstances in which he found himself because of
LLC 2 business problems, he acted reasonably based on the legal advice given. He and
his wife are also working to resolve the one remaining credit card debt personally
guaranteed by them.
 Most significantly, Applicant has taken affirmative action to pay or resolve most
of the delinquent debts raising security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) He has not been
able to pay the last remaining credit card debt of more than $25,000.00 because the
debt is currently in the court system, as he must work through the legal system as well
as obtain the cooperation of an unwilling creditor. Applicant is willing to settle this debt
either by payment of a specific amount or through a payment plan. This debt cannot be
a source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all
his debts are paid: it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his
fitness to hold a security clearance. While one debt remain unpaid, it is insufficient to
raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) In weighing all the evidence of record,
Applicant has mitigated the Government’s security concerns about the financial
problems created by the companies operated by his wife.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
13
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
