KEYWORD: Guideline M; Guideline E
DIGEST: Under the circumstances of this case, and in light of the Directive’s provision the the
Federal Rules of Evidence serve only as a guide, it was not unfair for the Judge to admit a
government exhibit in redacted form and to consider it as substantive evidence.  The record
provides no reason to believe that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 10-08390.a1
DATE: 03/30/2012
DATE: March 30, 2012
In Re:
----------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-08390
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 2, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline M (Use of Information
1Applicant admitted the SOR allegation under Guideline M alleging that he looked at pornographic web sites
on Government computers while at work.  His reply to the SOR explained this admission in a manner similar to the
Judge’s findings.
2Applicant was not employed by AGA.  It administered the polygraphs on behalf of yet another agency (AGA2)
by which Applicant was, at the time, employed.  
2
Technology Systems) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 4, 2012,
after the hearing, Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in admitting certain
documents; whether the Judge’s credibility determination was erroneous; and whether the Judge’s
overall decision was not supported by the weight of the evidence.  Consistent with the following,
we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a 60-year-old
unmarried man.  He served in the Navy, on active duty from 1969 until 1979 and in the Reserves
from 1988 to 1998.  He did not have a security clearance while in the Navy.  He has worked in
assurance security since 1997.   He held a top secret clearance in 2003 and was given access to
sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in 2005.  In 2008 his security clearance was suspended
because he used a Government laptop to view pornographic web sites.  He did not appeal this
decision because he did not understand the process.  Applicant had been assigned to various
Government agencies from 2003 to 2009.  His job involved trouble shooting systems.  He described
his role as monitoring all activity on a computer system.  He also ensured that systems adhered to
a client’s security policy.  He would use an “intrusion detection system” to detect threats.  Applicant
claimed that his having viewed pornography on Government computer systems was part of his
duties.1  He would use tools to block intrusions, including those involving pornography, and report
on them to his client.
At one point, Applicant underwent a series of polygraph examinations administered by
another Government agency (AGA).2  A subsequent letter, dated September 12, 2008, from a Senior
Adjudication Officer advised Applicant that his access to classified information was denied.  The
stated reason for the denial was Applicant’s having admitted, during the course of the polygraph
interviews, that he had viewed adult pornography on Government computer systems.  The letter also
stated that Applicant had admitted regularly viewing images of nude females between the ages of
11 and 16 on his home computer.  He would view pornography about two times a week at work,
because the security rules were lax.  He was later deterred from such activity because of
improvements in security monitoring.  Applicant knew that this activity was wrong.
Applicant advised that he had about 50 images of underage pornography on his home
computer.  He also stated to polygraph interviewers that he had visited teen chat rooms and had
interacted sexually with other members.  At the hearing he stated that he had a number of computers
in his home, some of which he would use to view chat rooms on dating web sites.  He stated that he
3
did so in order to view people his age.  During his hearing testimony, he denied having looked at
child pornography, having looked at pornography at work except as part of his official duties, and
having entered teen chat rooms.  He denied having made these statements to the polygraph
interviewers.  He testified that a Government exhibit containing these admissions was false.
Applicant has received numerous awards and accolades from his job.  One witness, his
girlfriend, testified that she did not believe the allegations in the SOR.  Another witness, a friend,
opined that Applicant is trustworthy. 
In the Analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant’s testimony denying culpability was not
credible.  She stated that he had not accepted responsibility for his conduct and, accordingly, had
not demonstrated rehabilitation.  She characterized his behavior as serious, spanning a ten-year
period.  Accordingly, she stated that she had doubts about his suitability for a security clearance. 
Applicant has challenged the Judge’s decision to admit two pieces of Government evidence.
Government Exhibit (GE) 2 is a set of answers to DOHA interrogatories, containing, inter alia, two
documents.  One is a letter stating that the AGA2 had denied Applicant access to classified
information, based on his admissions of misconduct as described above.  The other is a letter from
the Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office, advising him that his clearance had been
suspended due to the prior action of AGA2.  Applicant had provided these documents to DOHA in
response to the interrogatories.  The other challenged exhibit is GE 5, which is a letter from AGA,
attached to which is a summary of Applicant’s answers to the polygraph interviewer’s questions.
This exhibit is a basis for the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s admissions concerning his having
looked at pornography at work, having looked at child pornography at home, having maintained
images of child pornography on his computer, and having entered a teen chat room.  We examine
a Judge’s ruling on the admission of evidence to determine if the ruling is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-08813 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 15, 2005).  
   Applicant contends that GE 2 was not relevant.  The reason for this contention is that the
Government had withdrawn a SOR allegation under Guideline E to the effect that Applicant had
been disapproved for a clearance based on his having viewed pornography at work.  Applicant
argues that, because this allegation was withdrawn, the documents contained in GE 2 were not
relevant to matters before the Judge.  However, despite the withdrawal of the allegation, these
documents are relevant insofar as they show administrative consequences flowing directly form
Applicant’s security significant  misconduct under Guideline M.  They also are relevant to a whole-
person analysis.  The Judge did not err in admitting GE 2.
Applicant contends that GE 5 was not admissible under any provision of the Directive and,
by admitting it and considering it as substantive evidence, the Judge denied Applicant his right to
confront witnesses adverse to him.  GE 5 is a six-page summary of Applicant’s statements to the
polygraphers from the official file maintained by AGA on Applicant, along with a cover letter from
an Associate General Counsel of AGA.  The cover letter states that (1) the document was redacted
“to delete classified information, extraneous and administrative data and other information
excludable pursuant to applicable law or regulation;” (2)  the exhibit is a true copy of the original
4
maintained during the regular course of AGA business; (3) it was the regular course of business for
AGA personnel with knowledge of the matters at hand to record or transmit to be recorded
information to be included in the record; and (4) the record was made at or near the time of the
matters at hand.  The letter goes on to say that AGA would permit the Judge to examine unredacted
copies to allow admission into the record of the redacted ones.
Applicant contends that the admission of this exhibit was not consistent with Directive ¶
E3.1.22, which entitles an applicant to cross-examine a person who had made a statement adverse
to him on a controverted issue.  He also contends that this exhibit did not satisfy the requirements
of ¶ E3.1.20, insofar as there was no authenticating witness and, in Applicant’s view, GE 5 did not
qualify as a either a business record or a public record under Fed. Rules of Evid. 803 (6) and (8).
¶ E3.1.20 provides that
[o]fficial records or evidence compiled or created in the regular course of business,
other than DoD personnel background reports of investigation (ROI), may be
received and considered by the Administrative Judge without authenticating
witnesses, provided that such information has been furnished by an investigative
agency pursuant to its responsibilities in connection with assisting the Secretary of
Defense, or the Department or Agency head concerned, to safeguard classified
information . . . An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness provided it
is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence[.] (internal citations
omitted)    
In this case, there is nothing in the evidence or in other matters attached to the file to
contradict the representations in the cover letter about the nature of GE 5.  This exhibit, therefore,
is an official record within the meaning of the Directive.  Moreover, it is not a DoD ROI.  Rather,
it is a record maintained by an agency other than the DoD.  Accordingly, there was no requirement
either for an authenticating witness or for strict compliance with the Federal Rules of Evidence. 
Generally, the Federal Rules of Evidence serve as a guide in DOHA proceedings, and they may be
relaxed to permit the development of the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.19.  We conclude that GE 5
satisfied the requirements of ¶ E3.1.20.  Accordingly, Applicant was not denied a right of
confrontation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06997 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2011).  ¶ E3.1.22 does not
require exclusion of statements that are admissible under ¶ E3.1.20.  ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at
4 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2009).  Furthermore, under Fed. Rule Evid. 803(8), records of a government
agency setting forth, in civil actions or proceedings, “factual findings resulting from an investigation
made pursuant to authority granted by law” are admissible unless there is a basis to “indicate lack
of trustworthiness.”  There is no basis in the record to conclude that GE 5 lacks trustworthiness for
purposes of Fed. Rule Evid. 803.  
Applicant argues that, in light of Fed. Rule Evid. 106, it was improper for the Judge to have
admitted only the redacted portions of GE 5.  Rule 106 provides that when “a writing or recorded
statement or part thereof is introduced by a party, an adverse party may require the introduction at
that time of any other part or any other writing or recorded statement which ought in fairness to be
3Of course, a Judge can consider the state of a piece of evidence in assigning it weight.
4Applicant made a request to AGA under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) for release of the documents
pertaining to his clearance investigation.  He was not satisfied with the result, and he argues that it is unfair for DOHA
to proceed against him.  The extent to which AGA complied with FOIA is not a matter within our jurisdiction.  
5
considered contemporaneously with it.”  According to the AGA Associate General Counsel, the
redactions were for the purpose of protecting classified information or other information with
national security implications, as well as extraneous matters, in accordance with the law.  The record
provides no reason to dispute this assertion, and Federal agencies and employees are entitled to a
presumption of good faith in the performance of their responsibilities.  See, e.g., Sierra Club v.
Costle, 657 F.2d 298, 334 (D.C. Cir. 1981).  
In criminal cases, the Government might be forced to choose between its interests in
prosecuting a crime and in protecting classified information.  See, e.g., United States v. Moussaoui,
382 F.3d 453 (4th Cir. 2004).  In a DOHA proceeding, however, in which protection of national
security is paramount, an applicant’s interest in discovery must be balanced by another agency’s
lawful interest in safeguarding national security information.  We note that, in an appropriate case
and with prior approval by DoD GC, a Judge may examine classified information that an applicant
cannot inspect.  Directive ¶ E3.1.21.  The AGA Associate General Counsel cover letter included in
GE 5 offered the Judge an opportunity to examine the unredacted document.  Neither party
requested any such a procedure, however.  Under the circumstances, and in light of the Directive’s
provision that the Federal Rules of Evidence serve only as a guide, we conclude that it was not
unfair for the Judge to admit GE 5 in its redacted form and to consider it as substantive evidence.3
Accordingly, the Judge’s admission of the challenged evidence was not arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.4  
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in her credibility determination, in that she found
the Government’s exhibits to be more worthy of belief than the testimony, witnesses, and other
evidence provided by Applicant.  We have considered this argument in light of the record.  While,
as stated above, GE 5 was admitted in redacted form, the summary of Applicant’s actual responses
was detailed and specific.  A reasonable person could conclude either that the summary was a
depiction of Applicant’s answers or that it was a willful fabrication by officials of AGA.  A
reasonable person would not likely conclude that it represented simply a misunderstanding of
purportedly exculpatory answers.  Applicant offered no plausible reason for AGA personnel going
about their assigned duties to have made up such answers as are reflected in GE 5, nor does the
record contain any such reason.  
To a certain extent, GE 5 is corroborated by other evidence.  For example, Applicant
acknowledged that he had stated to the polygraphers a belief that his having looked at pornography
at work was wrong.  Tr. at 120, 152.  According to GE 5, Applicant told the polygraphers that he
had numerous computers in his house.  One of his character witnesses corroborated this information.
Tr. at 38.  Applicant acknowledged that certain statements in GE 5 concerning Applicant’s work
5 “[Q]: Did you tell them that you worked at [agency] from October 1996 to October 2000? [A]: Yes, I did .
. . [Q]: It says next that you advised that the rules were very lax and there [were] no security policies. [A]: Yes.  That’s
true.  Yes. [Q]: So you made that statement? [A]: Yes . . . [Q]: Then it says that you advised – that at [another agency]
there were too many people around, as well as cameras monitoring people’s activities. [A]: Yes.”  Tr. at 159, 161.  
6
history and his employer’s security policies were correct.5  On the other hand, Applicant’s testimony
that has job had required him to look at pornography while at work was not corroborated.
Considering the entirety of the record evidence.  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility
determination.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1 (“[T]he Appeal Board shall give deference to the
credibility determinations of the Administrative Judge”).
To an extent, Applicant’s argument on appeal amounts to a disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence.  However, the record provides no reason to believe that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
08-00826 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2010).  The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined
the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this
record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
7
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
