Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-9 and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-E. AE E was1
timely received post-hearing.
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXX, Xxxxx Xxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 10-10711
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 12 July 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F,
Financial Considerations.  The Government later raised additional concerns under2
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 29 November 2011, and I convened a hearing
12 January 2012. DOHA received the transcript 19 January 2012.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.d-1.e and
1.h-1.j, that he claimed to have paid. He denied falsifying clearance applications in
March 1997 and April 2010. He is a 36-year-old job training specialist employed by a
defense contractor since April 2010. He has not previously held an industrial clearance,
but had a clearance while he was in the U.S. military from February 1997 to April 2004. 
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits confirm, 11 delinquent debts totaling
over $80,000; he admits six debts totaling over $78,000. He claims to have paid the five
debts that he denied, but only documented paying debt 1.j in November 2010—after
writing a bad check to pay the debt in February 2010 (AE E).
The admitted debts consist of delinquent first and second mortgages totaling
nearly $53,000 (SOR 1.a, 1.b), two delinquent time-share loans totaling nearly $15,000
(SOR 1.f, 1.g), a $1,000 delinquent education loan (SOR 1.e), and a $9,700 Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) lien (SOR 1.k). The delinquent mortgage balances reflect the
deficiency balance after a short sale of the property. Applicant claims, without
corroboration, that his realtor told him he would have no liability for any balance after
the short sale. Applicant has had no contact with the mortgage holder, but states that he
will make some arrangement with the creditor if necessary to keep his clearance (Tr.
51). He claimed, without corroboration, to have established a repayment plan with the
education loan creditor. Similarly, he claimed, without corroboration to have repayment
schedule with the IRS, but documented only one October 2011 payment of $300 (AE
E).
Applicant attributes his financial problems to the fact that his wife was always
responsible for family finances, and the financial pressures of maintaining two
households when he got out of the military in April 2004 and moved to another state to
find work. He was unaware of his financial problems when interviewed by a Government
investigator in May 2010 (GE 3), but took little or no action then to resolve his debts,
and took little or no action after receiving the SOR in July 2011.
Applicant has favorable work references (AE A-D). He has not had any financial
counseling or presented a budget.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
3
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has been disengaged from—
and disinterested in—his financial problems and shows little intention of resolving his
debts.4
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  The factors that contributed to his5
financial problems can certainly recur. While Applicant was in the military he deferred to
his wife to handle the family finances. This is a choice, not a circumstance beyond his
control. Further, he appears to have left the military without any particular plan for his
next employment. Finally, Applicant has known of the Government’s concerns about his
finances since at least May 2010, yet is no more involved in his finances, as
documented efforts show, than he was while he was in the military. He has not acted
responsibly in addressing his debts.  The Government is not the collection agent of last6
resort, but has a legal and moral interest in whether applicants faithfully discharge their
financial obligations. Applicant has received no credit or financial counseling, nor has he
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to
¶ 20 (a) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications7
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
4
bring them under control.  He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  I7 8
conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
The Government did not establish a case for disqualification under Guideline E.
Applicant was unaware of his financial situation when he completed clearance
applications in March 1997 and April 2010. Consequently, he lacked the required intent
to falsify those applications. I resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-I, k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph j: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
