  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10161 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had three accounts placed for collection, three charged-off accounts, 
and four past due accounts that totaled approximately $55,000. All accounts have been 
paid or brought current. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under 
financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 15, 2011, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
1 
  
 On October 28, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
January 12, 2012, I was assigned the case. On January 19, 2012, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on February 2, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 7, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through I, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information. Additional material was submitted in a timely 
manner. Department Counsel had no objection to the material, it was admitted into the 
record as Exs. L through O. On February 13, 2012, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in the SOR. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old business manager who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2009 and is seeking to retain a secret security clearance. (Tr. 31) 
His annual salary is between $105,000 and $110,000. (Tr. 40) His wife graduates this 
semester with a degree in social work. (Tr. 39)  
 During 1994, within four months of graduating high school, Applicant had 
married, his wife had a baby, and he joined the Air Force. (Tr. 20) He and his wife have 
two children ages 17 and 10. At age 20, he bought his first home. (Tr. 20) In 1996, he 
was discharged from the Air Force for medical reasons due to an inner-ear disorder. (Tr. 
32)  
 In May 2005, he obtained his master’s degree. In 2007, he and his wife 
separated and his financial problems began. Prior to their separation, his wife handled 
the family’s finances. After he moved out, his wife was afraid to tell him she was having 
trouble paying the bills thinking it would impact on the restoration of their marriage. (Tr. 
36) They had agreed Applicant would spend so much each month and the rest would be 
used by the family. However, his wife needed to use credit cards to maintain household 
expenses. (Tr. 36) By the time they moved back together, they were unable to make 
even the minimum payments. (Tr. 36)  His wife signed up for a debt consolidation. (Tr. 
37)  
 Applicant contacted each of his creditors. The only creditor to respond indicated 
they would write off the debt and refer it to a collection agency. (Tr. 37)  
 Since moving back together, all of the SOR obligations have been paid except for 
the student loans, which he is currently paying. (Tr. 21) In order to pay the debts 
Applicant did something he did not want to do. He took money from a savings account 
that had been set aside for his daughter’s college education. (Tr. 38)  
2 
 In the past, Applicant’s wife has suffered from depression necessitating multiple 
hospital stays. (Tr. 33) Her last episode was April 2010. She had a two-day hospital stay 
due to severe anxiety. The stay was not covered by insurance. (Tr. 33) Prior to January 
2008, Applicant and his wife were going to counseling three times a week at a cost of 
$100 to $150 per session. Counseling continued until June of 2009. The employee 
assistance program paid for the first ten visits. (Tr. 34)  
 
 Applicant is current on his $990 monthly house payments. (Tr. 40) He is current 
on his $614 monthly car payments for the 2011 Mazda purchased in May 2011. (Tr. 57) 
He owes no money on his other vehicles, a 2004 Dodge and 2006 Toyota. (Tr. 40) He is 
not receiving calls or letters from creditors demanding money. He has no credit cards. 
He is current on his $307 monthly payments on his student loan. (Tr. 41)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s SOR accounts follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Collection account for 
electrical service at prior 
location. (Tr. 43) 
 
 
$108 Paid. (Exs. A and K) When Applicant left 
his previous state, the electric utility 
provided a letter of good standing to his 
new utility company so he did not have 
to provide a $500 deposit. (Tr. 38)  
b Collection account for 
cable service. 
 
$122 
 
Paid. (Ex. L) Applicant paid the account 
by telephone. The company was 
unwilling to provide Applicant with proof 
of payment. (Tr. 45)  
c Charged-off account. 
 
$2,572 
 
Paid. (Ex. B) Account settled for $1,543. 
(Tr. 46)  
d Bank credit card account 
charged off. 
$6,690 Paid. (Exs. C and AN-4) His credit 
reports list a zero balance. (Tr. 50)  
e Department store 
charged-off account. 
$437 Account settled and paid. (Exs. D and 7, 
Tr. 51-52)  
f Student loan account 
over 180 days past due. 
$17,582 Account is current. (Exs. E, F, N, AN 5, 
and AN 6, Tr. 52)  
g Student loan account 
over 180 days past due. 
$21,711 Account is current. (Exs. E, F, N, AN 5, 
and AN 6, Tr. 52)  
h Collection account for cell 
phone.  
$69 In March 2009, Applicant paid $272 on 
his telephone account when he moved 
to a new state. (Exs. O and AN 7, Tr. 
52) He is current on his account with 
this same telephone company. (Tr. 52)  
 
3 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
i Credit card account past 
due. 
$2,102 Paid in October 2011. (Exs. 2, G, and 
AN 8)  
j Account over 120 days 
past due. High credit on 
the account was $3,748. 
$3,748 Paid. (Exs. M, AN 3, AN-9, Ex. 2, Tr. 48) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $55,141  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
4 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had three collection accounts, three charged-off accounts, and four 
past-due accounts, which totaled approximately $55,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
5 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 More than seventy percent of Applicant’s past-due accounts, approximately 
$40,000 of the $55,000 of debt, were two student loans, which have now been brought 
current. He has paid or brought current all of the collection, charged-off, and past-due 
accounts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) has limited applicability because the delinquent debts were recently 
paid and there were ten of them. Now that they have been paid or brought current, they 
no longer cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 Under AG & 20(b), Applicant’s wife suffers from depression, which necessitated 
multiple hospital stays. Neither her most recent hospital stay nor the tri-weekly 
counseling was covered by insurance. Importantly, Applicant has acted appropriately by 
paying and bringing current his obligations. AG & 20(b) applies.  
 
Under AG & 20 (c) and & 20 (d), Applicant has paid or brought current all of the 
SOR accounts. This shows his financial problems have been resolved and are under 
control. Additionally, he initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. AG & 20 (c) and & 20 (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
6 
7 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The majority of the past-due accounts 
were student loans, now brought current. All of the debt of concern listed in the SOR 
have been paid or brought current. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his 
debts are paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2 (a)(1).)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
