 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF SHEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-11131 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 19, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On June 23, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued her a set of interrogatories. She responded to the 
interrogatories on July 27, 2011.2
                                                          
1 Item 5 (SF 86), dated August 19, 2010. 
 On October 31, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated July 27, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 14, 2011. In two nearly 
identical statements, one dated November 8, 2011, and the other undated,3
 
 Applicant 
responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have her case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant on December 22, 2011, and she was afforded an 
opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM 
on January 6, 2012, but as of February 24, 2012, she had not submitted any further 
documents or other information. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2012. 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 12 (¶¶ 1.a.-1.c., 1.g.-1.n., and 1.r.) 
of the factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR. She either 
denied or was nonresponsive to the remaining allegations pertaining to financial 
considerations and personal conduct (¶¶ 1.d.-1.f., 1.o.-1.q., and 2.a. and 2.b.) of the 
SOR. Applicant’s admissions and other comments are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon 
due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since August 
2009, has been serving as a quality control manager. She was previously employed as 
a technical writer from July 2004 to August 2009; a lead data entry technician from 
January 1998 until July 2004; and a clerk typist from February 1975 until March 1993.4 
No further information was provided pertaining to other periods. She has held a Secret 
security clearance since August 2000.5 Applicant has never served in the U.S. military.6 
A 1967 high school graduate, Applicant attended college for two years, but she did not 
receive a degree.7
                                                          
3 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated November 8, 2011); Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, 
undated). The date on Item 3 is suspect, for if accurate, the Answer occurred before the SOR was received by 
Applicant. 
  
 
4 Item 5, supra note 1, at 15-20. 
 
5 Id. at 47. 
 
6 Id. at 21-22. 
 
7 Id. at 13. 
 
3 
                                      
 
Applicant was married in August 1969 and divorced in February 1977.8 She 
married her second husband in October 1977.9 She has three children, born in July 
1971, October 1972, and August 1978, respectively.10 She also has three stepchildren, 
born in July 1972, August 1974, and September 1976, respectively.11
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
It is unclear when Applicant first started to experience financial difficulties, but it 
appears that they may have commenced sometime around 1999, when the first of a 
number of tax liens was filed against her.12 In addition to an August 1999 state tax lien, 
in the amount of $1,996, (SOR ¶ 1.f.), there were four federal tax liens and one state tax 
lien filed against her.13 Among them were an April 2009 federal tax lien, in the amount 
of $8,075 (SOR ¶ 1.e.), an April 2009  state tax lien, in the amount of $236 (SOR ¶ 
1.o.), and a January 2010 federal tax lien, in the amount of $1,929 (SOR ¶ 1.d.). Those 
tax liens, according to Applicant, are also “being paid thru wage garnishment,”14 and 
Applicant has submitted documentation to support her claim.15 Applicant acknowledged 
that every time she and her husband file their tax returns, they do not always have the 
money to pay their taxes.16
 
  
Applicant stated that she and her spouse make “good money,” but they also have 
a “large amount of expenses.”17 She attributed those expenses to supporting a son, a 
grandchild, and a mother-in-law, each of whom had moved into her residence.18
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 Other 
than that general comment, she never described any conditions beyond her control that 
might have led to her financial difficulties. Applicant added that she takes care of her 
family first, and whatever money she has left over she uses to pay past-due debts and 
8 Id. at 26. 
 
9 Id. at 24-25. 
 
10 Id. at 29-30. 
 
11 Id. at 31-32. 
 
12 Item 7 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated August 26, 2010), at 6. While 
Applicant did not answer the allegation directly, she acknowledged that her 1999 tax lien was “being paid thru wage 
garnishment.” See Item 3, supra note 3, at 2. The SOR alleges the lien was a federal tax lien, but the credit report 
refers to the lien as a state tax lien filed by the state department of revenue. See Item 7, at 6.  
 
13 Item 7, at 5-8. 
 
14 Item 3, supra note 3, at 2-3. 
 
15 Item 6 (Earnings Statements, various dates), attached to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, wherein a 
tax levy of $389.58 is being taken from Applicant’s pay every two weeks. 
 
16 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated September 8, 2010, at 2), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. 
 
4 
                                      
 
current bills.19 As a result of the unspecified expenses, Applicant has insufficient funds 
to pay her taxes and a number of accounts. As a result, accounts became delinquent 
and were placed for collection or charged off. One delinquent account for an auto loan 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.) resulted in the vehicle being repossessed.20
 
 
In addition to the tax liens, Applicant has a number of delinquent accounts, 
totaling $11,698, for which she has made no payments. She admitted the allegations 
set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. ($111), 1.b. ($40), 1.c. ($143), 1.g. ($3,368), 1.h. ($845), 1.i. 
($818), 1.j. ($542), 1.k. ($1,095), 1.l. ($411), 1.m. ($300), 1.n. ($572), and 1.r. ($92). 
She claims to be unaware of the two remaining delinquent accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.p. for 
$988, and 1.g. for $2,373), although she indicated in September 2010 that she would 
follow up on those accounts to arrange payments if she owes them.21
 
 There is no 
evidence that she ever contacted the creditors or their respective collection agents in 
order to resolve those accounts. 
Applicant’s son was employed some time before September 2010, and that has 
alleviated some of her financial hardship.22 While Applicant has not submitted a 
personal financial statement reflecting a total annual net income, it appears from her 
earnings statements that she is receiving a net salary between $1,639 and $1,675 every 
two weeks.23 She has submitted no evidence pertaining to her husband’s net income, 
their monthly expenses, or money remaining for discretionary spending or savings. 
Applicant stated she would turn her attention to her delinquent accounts once her tax 
liens were resolved.24
 
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has ever received financial 
counseling in money management, debt management, debt repayment, or budgeting.  
 
In March 2007 and October 2009, despite her financial delinquencies, Applicant 
took vacations of unspecified lengths to the Bahamas and Mexico, respectively.25
 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
On August 19, 2010, when Applicant completed and submitted her SF 86, she 
responded to several questions set forth in the SF 86. The SOR alleges Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose complete information in response to the following financial 
                                                          
 
19 Id. 
 
20 Item 3, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
21 Item 6, supra note 16, at 2-3. 
 
22 Id. at 4. 
 
23 Item 6, supra note 15. 
 
24 Item 6, supra note 2, at 6. 
 
25 Item 5, supra note 1, at 43-44. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
questions: § 26c - (Have you failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes, or to file a tax 
return, when required by law or ordinance?) (SOR ¶ 2.a.), and § 26m – (Have you been 
over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)? (SOR ¶ 2.b.). Appellant answered “no” to 
both questions.26 She denied intentionally falsifying the material facts, and contended 
the first question was “confusing,” and that the second question only brought to her 
memory the repossessed vehicle, “because it was the only active account.”27 Applicant 
claimed she was unaware of the tax liens and was also unaware “of much of it,” 
referring to the other delinquent accounts.28
   
 She did not list any of her tax liens which 
came within the scope of the question (SOR ¶¶ 1.d. through 1.f., and 1.o.). As for the 
second question, Applicant did acknowledge having accounts that were “currently over 
90 days delinquent,” but she did not list any other delinquent accounts which came 
within the scope of the question. Considering the known status of the various delinquent 
accounts, Applicant’s responses to the questions are difficult to accept or align with the 
truth, and therefore, I conclude that she did deliberately falsify her responses. 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”29 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”30
 
   
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
                                                          
26 SF 86, supra note 1, at 48-49. 
 
27 Item 3, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
28 Item 6, supra note 16, at 4. 
 
29 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
30 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”31 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.32
 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”33
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”34
 
 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
                                                          
31 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
32 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
33 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
34 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. As noted above, on numerous occasions between 1999 and 2010, 
Applicant failed to pay the required income taxes with her federal or state income tax 
returns, and both the IRS and the state were forced to file tax liens and take 
garnishment actions in order to obtain the delinquent balances. In addition, several 
accounts became delinquent, and remain, to this day, unresolved. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@35
                                                          
35 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
 
8 
                                      
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. The nature, frequency, and relative recency of 
Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties and failures to pay federal and state income 
taxes between 1999 and 2010, as well as numerous other accounts, make it difficult to 
conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” Applicant offered only a 
comment about insufficient funds causing her inability to pay her income tax in a timely 
manner. In light of her lengthy period of continuing financial problems, and still owing 
the federal and state income taxes, despite the continuing garnishments, it is unlikely 
that they will be resolved in the short term. Accordingly, Applicant failed to mitigate her 
financial situation, and under the circumstances, her actions do cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.36
 
   
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies because there is very little evidence that Appellant’s 
financial situation was, in any way, caused by circumstances that were beyond her 
control. Her sole explanation was that because she was also supporting her son, 
grandson, and mother-in-law, she had insufficient funds, but she never explained how 
or why those conditions existed or how they impacted her finances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply as there is no evidence to indicate Applicant has ever 
received counseling in money management, debt management, debt repayment, or 
budgeting.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies. Applicant had her salary garnished by the IRS and 
the state government, but those actions do not qualify as “good-faith” efforts. Her tax 
liens and other delinquent accounts are still pending, and there is no evidence that 
Applicant has generated any effort to resolve them. Applicant’s statements regarding 
her future intent to resolve her liens and other delinquent accounts, without any 
affirmative efforts by her, or without corroborating documentary evidence, are entitled to 
little weight.37
 
 Those promises do not qualify as “good-faith” efforts.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
36 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
37 See ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). 
 
9 
                                      
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying.  
 
Applicant’s omissions in her SF 86 responses to the inquiries pertaining to 
financial delinquencies, provide sufficient evidence to examine if her submissions were 
deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or were the result of reliance on a poor 
memory, as she contends. Applicant was aware that she was not paying her federal and 
state income tax at the times she filed her returns; that she did not have sufficient 
money to pay her monthly bills; that there were delinquent accounts, a repossession, 
and income tax liens; and that there were garnishments taking funds from her paycheck 
twice a month. After examining her responses and explanations, it seems unreasonable 
for her to take the position she has taken. Under those circumstances, I find Applicant’s 
explanations are not credible in her denial of deliberate falsification. AG ¶ 16(a) has 
been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of them apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
 
10 
                                      
 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.38
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct: Although she 
did not pay her income taxes during a multi-year period, she did file her federal or state 
income tax returns, and through garnishment, is in the process of resolving several 
federal and state tax liens.  
       
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has a long history of not paying federal or state income tax and generating 
other financial delinquencies. Her claims of insufficient funds because of having 
increased expenses due to her son, grandchild, and mother-in-law, are unsubstantiated, 
and given her recent foreign vacations, Applicant could have made some efforts to 
resolve her accounts in a more timely fashion. Applicant’s actions indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.r.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
38 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
