1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-06393
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On September 12, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). DOHA took action under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In an October 5, 2011, response, Applicant admitted 15 of 17 allegations raised
under Guideline F and requested a hearing before a DOHA administrative judge. DOHA
assigned the case to me on December 14, 2011. The parties proposed a hearing date
of February 1, 2012. A notice setting that date for the hearing was issued on January 6,
2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Applicant gave testimony and offered two documents, which were accepted
without objection as exhibits (Exs.) A-B. He was given until February 24, 2012, to
submit any additional documents. The Government introduced five documents and one
schematic aid, which were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. 1-5 and
 Confirmation of this call was made telephonically. It is noted that Applicant may have inadvertently mailed      1
a hard copy of his materials to the hearing site, which was in a non-DoD facility in a different state, or to
another DOHA address. Lacking contact from Applicant, however, those possibilities cannot be explored. 
 Tr. 23.      2
2
Hearing Exhibit 1, respectively. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on
February 9, 2012. 
On February 27, 2012, Applicant contacted Department Counsel and stated that
he had difficulties submitting his materials by facsimile transmission. Department
Counsel responded by urging Applicant to resend the transmission and send a copy
either via post or email. Department Counsel also checked with his office to make sure
no transmissions were accidently delivered to another counsel. When no documents
arrived, Department Counsel emailed Applicant on March 7, 2012, asking him to
confirm whether documents were sent, en route, or whether Applicant had decided not
to submit any materials. When no response was received by March 12, 2012,
Department Counsel left a voice message on Applicant’s phone asking him to return
the call. After consultation with me, Department Counsel left a second telephonic
message explaining the urgency of receiving the materials or hearing from him in some
manner that day.  On March 15, 2012, four additional documents were received and1
forwarded to me from Department Counsel. They were accepted into the record as Exs.
C-F and the record was closed. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions, and
exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden of mitigating security concerns related
to financial considerations. Clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old electrical mechanic who has worked for the same
defense contractor for a year. He has a high school diploma, completed some college
courses, and has four years experience as an electrical journeyman. Applicant is a
single parent raising one pre-teen child. 
In 2006, Applicant was involved in a car accident which left him disabled and
demanded a little over a year off from work to recuperate. While he tried to honor his
obligations during his period of unemployment, some bills went unpaid as he depleted
his savings. Many of those debts were related to his medical care.  He returned to his
workplace in late 2007, where he discovered layoffs were underway. Applicant was
required to reapply for employment, but no offers were extended. Consequently, he
filed for food stamps (SNAP benefits) at the end of 2007, which he received for about
four months. He did not otherwise receive unemployment or disability assistance.  2
Starting in early 2008, Applicant did itinerant subcontracting work for area
electrical contractors to generate some income. Jobs, however, were sporadic due to a
downward trend in the local economy. He ultimately started work with his present
employer in March 2011. 
 Tr. 13.      3
 Ex. B (Bank statement, period ending Oct. 27, 2011) regarding debt of $55.41; Tr. 42-43.      4
 Id.      5
 Ex. C (Handwritten note, Feb. 26, 2012).      6
3
Since that time, Applicant has made it a goal to satisfy “one to two debts every
two months or so depending on the amount.”  He currently earns about $2,400 a month3
with regular monthly expenses of under $1,950. He and his family moved in with
Applicant’s father, with whom Applicant shares expenses. He uses a prepaid phone
service. He saved sufficient funds to purchase a used vehicle, which enables him to be
available for overtime work. He had hoped to apply his 2011 tax refund toward his
debts, but the used vehicle recently needed repairs. It is his goal to satisfy his
delinquent debt as soon as possible so he can start saving for a home. To that end, he
uses a flexible budget to help him sustain his current lifestyle while addressing past
debt. But for the delinquent debt at issue, Applicant lives well within his means and is
able to support his son and girlfriend. Any net monthly remainder is put into savings to
apply toward old debt. At his present job, he has a 401(k) account. Applicant has no
other savings accounts because any savings he acquires are applied toward his
delinquent debt.    
The 17 debts at issue amount to approximately $15,700. Applicant provided
evidence showing that the $55 debt noted at ¶ 1.g was paid through a collection entity.4
The $503 debt noted at ¶ 1.i was shown as paid. He also showed that the $131 and
$111 debts noted at ¶ 1.k and ¶ 1.l were addressed.  Consequently, there is evidence5
that about $800 of the debt at issue is paid. Applicant wrote that he has disputed some
of the accounts at issue, but he failed to provide evidence of those disputes.   6
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      8
 Id.      9
 Id.      10
4
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a7
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  8
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access9
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.  Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial10
Considerations) is  the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
 AG ¶ 18.      11
 Id.      12
5
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  It11
also states that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.”  The Government’s evidence shows that12
Applicant owes about $15,700 in delinquent debt. Applicant admitted most of the debts
at issue. There is only evidence tending to show that four debts have been paid (¶¶ 1.g,
1.I, 1.k, and 1.l, amounting to about $800. Such facts are sufficient to raise Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and
mitigate security concerns. 
The debts at issue are multiple in number and became delinquent in the last five
years, the result of an unforeseen accident and periods of unemployment or
underemployment. Such facts are sufficient to give rise to Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). 
However, while mitigation may be available with regard to the creation of the
debts at issue, there is no documentary evidence proving that any debts except those
noted at ¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l have been paid, formally disputed, or otherwise
addressed. Applicant uses a budget, but there is no evidence he has received financial
counseling. Lacking more evidence as to his efforts to meet his obligations, it is unclear
as to how he would behave if ill health, unemployment, or financial hard times should
come again. In the absence of such documentary evidence, no other mitigating
conditions apply. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. In addition, what constitutes reasonable behavior in such cases,
as contemplated by FC MC ¶ 20(b), depends on the specific facts in a given case. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 33-year-old engineer. He has considerable training and experience in
6
electrical engineering. Applicant is raising his child and supporting his girlfriend. He
suffered a severe injury in 2006 that necessitated a protracted recovery, then was
unemployed before accepting itinerant jobs. These events depleted his savings and
caused him to acquire delinquent debt.  
Applicant was very credible and straightforward at the hearing. The Government
was lenient in extending Applicant’s deadline for submitting additional materials on
multiple occasions. In the end, the record was kept open for nearly six weeks, affording
Applicant sufficient time to amass his evidence. In the end, Applicant only offered
evidence of four debts being paid, amounting to about $800 of the approximately
$15,700 at issue. His hope to apply a 2011 tax refund toward his debts was dashed
when the refund proceeds were needed for car repairs. Although his representations at
the hearing indicated considerably more progress toward resolving his financial situation,
undocumented representations and promises to pay in the future carry little weight in
these proceedings. 
Based on the evidence before me and in light of Applicant’s credible testimony, it
can be concluded that only the four debts noted at ¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l (amounting to
about $800) have been addressed; the balance of the approximately $15,700 at issue
remains unaddressed. This process does not require that an applicant satisfy all debts
at issue, but it does require a showing that a workable and effective plan for addressing
one’s debts has been successfully implemented. Although Applicant articulated a
workable and reasonable plan for repaying his debts, he presented insufficient
evidence to show that it has been successfully implemented. As noted, any reasonable
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information
must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive information. Consequently,
financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.m-1.q: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
