 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06667 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on October 1, 2010. On November 30, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On December 20, 2011, Applicant answered 
 
2 
 
 
the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2012. 
DOHA issued the Notice of Hearing on January 26, 2012. The hearing was held as 
scheduled on February 16, 2012. Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 
that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through F that were admitted without objection. The record was left open 
until March 1, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional matters. No additional matters 
were received. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on March 6, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old electronics technician who works for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since March 2008. He graduated 
from high school in 1966. He served 24 years in the U.S. Air Force and retired in the 
grade of master sergeant (E-7) in 1994. He has been married and divorced twice. His 
first marriage was from 1970 to 2000 and his second marriage was from 2000 to 2009. 
He has two children, ages 37 and 39. In the past, he held a security clearance without 
incident. While in the Air Force, he was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal and two 
Air Force Commendation Medals. In 1984, he was designated the noncommission 
officer of the year at a major Air Force command.1 
 
The SOR lists 17 delinquent debts totaling $25,485. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted 14 of the delinquent debts totaling $22,929 and denied 3 delinquent 
debts totaling $2,556. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. Credit 
reports admitted into evidence provide substantial evidence of the denied debts.2  
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts include a personal loan, a payday loan, loans for a 
motorcycle and repossessed car, credit cards, utility bills, and medical bills. The date of 
last activity on these debts ranges from April 2004 to December 2010. He attributed his 
financial problems to his separation and divorce from his second wife. He separated 
from her in May 2007. Following their separation, he moved to a new residence and had 
to acquire furniture and other belongings. Due to these added expenses, he was unable 
to meet his financial obligations. At that time, he was also unemployed from May to 
September 2007 and, as discussed below, he also fell behind on alimony payments to 
his first wife. He also stated that he was self-employed from September 2007 to March 
2008, but earned little money. He indicated that, once the delinquencies started, he was 
unable to get back on track because of fees and penalties arising from the past-due 
debts.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 19, 21-25, 48-49; GE 1.  
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4, 5.  
3 Tr. 19-25, 48; GE 1, 2, 4, 5; AE C, D. During Applicant’s period of unemployment, he received 
unemployment compensation of about $300 per week. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was required to pay $818 per month in alimony to his first wife. In about 
May 2007, he began falling behind on those payments. On September 4, 2008, a court 
issued an Amended Order directing that he pay $818 per month in alimony and $300 
per month towards the arrearages. After issuance of the Amended Order, he continued 
to fail to make the required payments. The alimony arrearages grew to $4,800. On 
February 2, 2009, a court issued a garnishment order directing that $1,118 of his 
income be withheld for those payments. The garnishment was instituted in August 2009 
and substantially reduced his monthly disposable income. His alimony arrearages are 
not listed as a delinquent debt in the SOR. Additionally, he indicated that he was 
delinquent on a credit card from a military exchange that also was not alleged in the 
SOR. He stated he is paying $315 per month towards the exchange debt and his 
federal income tax refund for last year ($2,062) was intercepted and paid to that 
account.4 
 
Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a (cellular telephone bill of $123), 1.o 
(security alarm bill of $305), and 1.q (credit card bill of $2,128). As for ¶ 1.a, he claimed 
that he never had an account with that cellular telephone provider. He denied ¶ 1.o 
because the security alarm was at his ex-wife’s house and believed she should be 
responsible for that debt. His name was on the account for the security alarm. He 
provided no documents supporting his denials of the debts in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.o. He denied 
¶ 1.q because he claimed he was making payments on that debt. He provided two 
documents showing he made payments of $93 to a collection agency for this debt on 
September 2, 2011, and January 3, 2012. From September 2011 to January 2012, the 
balance of this debt was reduced from $2,118 to $1,788, confirming that he had been 
making monthly payments.5 
 
Applicant is currently making payments towards two delinquent debts, i.e., the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.q and the exchange credit card debt. He provided no proof of payments 
towards the other delinquent debts. He has not yet contacted a number of the other 
creditors about their delinquent debts. He indicated that he intends to resolve the 
delinquent debts. He stated that, once he pays off the exchange credit card debt, he will 
apply that extra money to the other delinquent debts.6 
 
During his Office of Personnel Management interview, Applicant stated that he is 
capable of meeting his current living expenses. At the hearing, however, he submitted a 
personal budget that showed his monthly income was $2,962 and his monthly fixed and 
variable expenses were $3,032, leaving him a negative net monthly remainder (-$70). 
The budget included payments towards the debts in SOR 1.q and the military exchange 
                                                          
4 Tr. 16-17, 23-25, 32-33, 41; GE. 2; AE C, D, F. Debts not alleged in the SOR will not be 
considered in applying the disqualifying conditions, but may be used in assessing Applicant’s overall 
financial situation, in applying the mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole-person” concept. 
5 Tr. 16-17, 19-21, 25-26, 39; GE 2, 3; AE E. 
6 Tr. 19-21, 26-41; GE 2; AE E. 
 
4 
 
 
credit card. In May and June 2009, he traveled to Australia for a vacation. This was a 
10-day trip that cost him $2,200 for the travel and lodging. He described this trip as a 
lifelong dream. In September 2010, he received financial counseling. He indicated the 
financial counseling consisted of going through his credit report and advising him on 
how to pay the debts.7 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
                                                          
7 Tr. 16-18, 36, 41-48, 50; GE 2; AE B. 
 
5 
 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has multiple delinquent debts that remain unresolved. His financial 
problems are significant and cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
From May to September 2007, Applicant was unemployed. From September 
2007 to March 2008, he was self-employed, but earned little money. During this period, 
he fell behind on his alimony payments to his first wife. He separated from his second 
wife in May 2007. He incurred additional expenses as a result to that separation. While 
his unemployment, underemployment, and marital separation were conditions beyond 
his control, he failed to establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Since March 2008, he has been employed, but has shown little progress towards 
resolving his debts. In May 2009, he traveled to Australia on a vacation when he had 
delinquent debts. He has yet to contact a number of the creditors in an effort to resolve 
their debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his financial problems. 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling in September 2010. Since September 
2011, he has been making monthly payments of $93 on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.q. He has 
also been making monthly payments towards a non-alleged debt. He provided no other 
proof of payments on the other alleged delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 
1.q, but not to the other alleged delinquent debts. In general, he failed to establish that 
his debts are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) marginally applies.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant denied the debts in SOR 1.a and 1.o, but presented no documentation 
to show he had a legitimate basis for disputing them. Specifically, he presented no 
evidence that he has disputed them on his credit reports. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. I have considered Applicant’s service in the Air Force. 
Nonetheless, his financial problems are ongoing and significant. While he has stated 
that he intends to resolve his delinquent debt, he has failed to show that he has taken 
meaningful steps to resolve them. At this juncture, it would be mere speculation to 
conclude his delinquent debts will be resolved in the future. His delinquent debts remain 
a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:   For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
