 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-05102 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Levi Kennedy, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Duffy James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Foreign Preference security concerns, but was unable to 
mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns due to his foreign contacts in the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC or China), a country that is ruled by an authoritarian 
government controlled by the Chinese Communist Party. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 29, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted a notification that the Government was ready to proceed 
 
2 
 
on December 14, 2011. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2012. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on January 25, 2012, and the hearing convened as 
scheduled on February 13, 2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 
that were admitted into evidence without objection. In Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, the 
Government also requested that administrative notice be taken of facts regarding the 
PRC. Applicant had no objection to the administrative notice request and it was granted. 
Applicant testified and submitted two exhibits (AE) A and B. Applicant’s list of exhibits 
was marked as HE 2. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 28, 2012.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant’s mother, father, brother, sister, mother-in-law, 
brother-in-law, and sister-in-law were citizens and residents of the PRC (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.e); that he provided about $1,000 per year in financial assistance to his 
parents and about $500 per year to his mother-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.f); that he maintained 
periodic contact with former academic colleagues from Chinese academic institutions 
(SOR ¶ 1.g); and that he possessed a Chinese passport that was issued in October 
1997 and, due to extensions, will expire in October 2012 (SOR ¶ 2.a). In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, denied ¶ 1.g, and admitted ¶ 2.a. 
With regard to the passport, he indicated that he cut its cover and was willing to 
relinquish it. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.1  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old engineer who works for a defense contractor. He has 
worked in his current position since November 2005. He obtained his undergraduate 
and graduate degrees from PRC universities. In 1994, he obtained a PhD in electrical 
engineering from a PRC university and specializes in advanced electromagnetic 
computation methods. He is married and has two children, ages 7 and 17. This is the 
first time that he has applied for a security clearance.2 
 
Applicant, his wife, and eldest child were born in the PRC. He was married in the 
PRC. His younger child was born in the United States. Applicant, his wife, and eldest 
child became U.S. citizens in 2008. His wife studied computer science in China, but is 
now a housewife. His wife and children visited China for a month in 2006 and 2009. He 
did not go with them on these trips.3 
 
The Chinese Government funded Applicant’s education, which was standard 
practice. Upon obtaining his doctorate degree, he was expected to work for five years at 
PRC universities to repay his education. Prior to coming to the United States, he worked 
as a research assistant/professor at two PRC universities from 1994 to 1997, but did not 
complete his work commitment. Due to his decision to immigrate to the United State, 
the PRC Government fined him $10,000 and seized his residence in China, which was 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
2 Tr. 18-21, 46-48 52; GE 1, 2. 
3 Tr. 18-21, 27, 42, 45-48; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
worth about $5,000. He paid the fine in 2000. He has no other financial obligations to 
the PRC Government.4  
 
Applicant originally came to the United States as a visiting scholar in 1997. He 
obtained a new U.S. visa in 2000. At that time, he decided that he wanted to stay 
permanently in the United States because he was unhappy with the level of corruption 
and environmental conditions in the PRC and wanted a better life. Since 2000, he 
worked as a research associate at two U.S. universities and then as a senior research 
scientist at a company before obtaining his current job.5 
 
Applicant’s mother and father live in a village in the PRC and are retired farmers. 
His father completed mandatory military service as a medic in the 1950s. He talks to his 
parents about once a month on the telephone and sends them about $1,000 per year as 
gifts. His brother and sister live close to his parents. His brother is a truck driver who 
delivers paint to customers. His sister is a tailor. He does not talk to his brother or sister 
regularly. His mother-in-law was an accountant for a private company. He generally 
does not talk to his mother-in-law directly, but his wife calls her about twice a month. His 
mother-in-law visited him and his wife in the United States in 2002. She stayed for about 
a year and a half. He and his wife provide his mother-in-law about $500 per year in gifts. 
His father-in-law is deceased and was a librarian. His sister-in-law is a self-employed 
attorney and her husband, his brother-in-law, works for her. Except for his father’s 
military service, none of his relatives have been employed by the PRC Government.6 
 
Applicant has no property in China. He does not maintain a checking account 
there. He returned to the PRC for two weeks in 2007. The purpose of this trip was to 
visit his parents and other relatives. While there, he gave a lecture to graduate students 
at a PRC university. A former colleague at that university invited him to give this lecture. 
His lecture concerned papers he wrote on computation methods that are available to 
the public. This PRC university focuses its studies on railroad construction and trains. 
Upon coming to the U.S., Applicant maintained email or telephone contact with this 
former colleague about three to seven times a year. In recent years, his contact with the 
former colleague has decreased. He had contact with this former colleague once last 
year. He used his Chinese passport during his 2007 trip because he was not a U.S. 
citizen at that time. He has also maintained infrequent contact with other former 
colleagues who reside in China.7 
 
Applicant is a volunteer at a Chinese school in the United States. His sons attend 
the school once a week, which is the only day it is open. This school teaches Chinese-
                                                          
4 Tr. 20-21, 34-37; GE 2. Applicant’s mother-in-law was residing in his Chinese residence when it 
was seized. 
5 Tr. 18-21, 24, 51-52; GE 2.  
6 Tr. 21-36, 48-50; GE 2. 
7 Tr. 24-27, 36-43, 50-51; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
American children about the Chinese language and culture, including art and dance. He 
also serves as the school’s treasurer.8 
 
Applicant stated that he had invalidated his PRC passport. He cut off one corner 
of this passport’s cover opposite the fold. The removed piece resembles a right triangle 
with the 90% angle being the cover’s corner. During his Office of Personnel 
Management interview, he stated that he was willing to relinquish his passport to proper 
officials. He had also cut his wife’s PRC passport in a similar manner, and she had to 
obtain a visa to travel to the PRC for her last trip there.9 
 
Visas are generally required for non-PRC citizens to travel to the PRC. For 
Applicant to obtain such a visa, the PRC Government provides:  
 
Original Chinese Passport – First-time applicants whose former 
nationality was Chinese, or who were born in China (including Hong Kong, 
Macao and Taiwan), need to submit the original Chinese passport and a 
photocopy of the passport’s information/photo page, and extension page 
(if applicable).10 
 
Applicant indicated that he does not have dual citizenship. He stated that the 
PRC does not recognize dual citizenship and, when he acquired his U.S. citizenship, he 
lost his PRC citizenship. He stated that he has kept his invalidated passport so that he 
could obtain a visa.11 
 
China12 
 
China is geographically vast, and has a population of over a billion people. It has 
significant resources and an economy that in recent years has expanded about 10% per 
year. The PRC has powerful military forces, including strategic nuclear missiles.  
 
China has an authoritarian government controlled by the Chinese Communist 
Party with a poor human rights record. It suppresses political dissent, engages in 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, and is involved with forced confessions, torture, and 
other prisoner mistreatment. China also monitors communications devices, such as 
telephones, telefaxes, and internet servers.  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 56; GE 2. 
9 Tr. 19-20, 43-45, 52-57; GE 3; AE B. 
10 AE A. 
11 Tr. 19-20, 43-45, 52-53; GE 2, 3; AE A, B. 
12 HE 1. The administrative notice request included U.S. Government publications and press 
releases. 
 
5 
 
In its 2009 Report to Congress, the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission (U.S.-China ERSC) stated:  
 
The Counterintelligence Community considers the People’s Republic of 
China to be one of the most aggressive countries targeting U.S. military, 
political, and economic secrets as well as sensitive U.S. trade secret and 
technologies.  
 
China was ranked second only to Iran as the leading destination for illegal 
exports of restricted U.S. technology. In discussing China's industrial espionage, the 
U.S.-China ERSC noted:  
 
Enterprise-directed espionage may also be growing in importance and 
taking on a less random and more targeted form. The 2008 unclassified 
report of the Defense Security Service cited a rise in efforts undertaken by 
commercial entities to target restricted technologies, speculating that this 
likely represents "a purposeful attempt to make contacts seem more 
innocuous by using non-governmental entities as surrogate collectors for 
interested government or government-affiliated entities. . . .  
 
Chinese intelligence personnel are more inclined than other foreign intelligence 
services to make use of sympathetic people willing to act as a "friend of China." While 
this most clearly has been seen in PRC-targeted recruitment of Chinese-Americans, 
PRC agents also have used U.S. citizens of other ethnic backgrounds as sources.  
 
China’s espionage and industrial theft activities are a threat to the security of 
U.S. technology. From 2007 to 2009, a number of individuals have been convicted in 
U.S. courts of espionage or export violations involving the PRC. China does not 
recognize dual nationality. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable here: 
 
 
7 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Under Guideline B, a security concern exists when an individual has foreign 
family members or other foreign contacts that may be manipulated to help a foreign 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests. In such situations, common sense 
suggests that the stronger the ties of affection or obligation are to a foreign contact, the 
more vulnerable a person is to being influenced if the foreign contact is brought under 
control or used by a foreign intelligence or security service.  
 
Here, Applicant has close and ongoing family ties in China, as does his wife. The 
strength of Applicant’s family ties is demonstrated by his monthly telephone contact with 
his parents, his travel to China in 2007 to visit his parents and other relatives, and the 
gifts he has provided to his parents and mother-in-law. During his trip to China in 2007, 
he also gave a lecture to graduate students at a PRC university. A former colleague at 
the university invited him to give this lecture. Since then, he has had infrequent contact 
with that former colleague, but did have contact with him once last year.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise this disqualifying conditions is a relatively low 
standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having family members or professional associates living under a foreign government. 
Specifically, the nature of a foreign government, its relationship with the U.S., and its 
human rights record are relevant factors in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
foreign contacts are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a foreign contact is associated with or dependent upon the foreign 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. 
In this case, China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Communist 
Party, with a poor human rights record, and aggressively targets U.S. military, political, 
and economic secrets for collection. Although Applicant’s foreign contacts are 
completely legal, they create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, both through him 
and through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply. 
 
 
 
8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f does not raise an independent disqualifying condition, but merely 
alleges facts that support SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. SOR ¶ 1.f is concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Three are potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant lived in China until he was about 30 years old. He has resided in the 
United States for the last 15 years. He became a U.S. citizen three years ago. His wife 
and children are U.S. citizens. Nonetheless, his family ties in China are not minimal, 
infrequent, or casual. Such contacts in China include close family members. He has 
also had contact with a former colleague who is a professor at a PRC university. While 
his contact with the former colleague has decreased over the years, he has had recent 
contact with that colleague. Given China’s intelligence operations against the United 
States, Applicant’s contacts who reside in China are in a position where there is a 
potential for them to be exploited in a way that could force Applicant to choose between 
loyalty to those individuals and the interests of the United States. While these are 
circumstances beyond Applicant’s control, they raise security concerns under Guideline 
B that have not been mitigated. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are not applicable. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
9 
 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport. 
 
 Applicant obtained a PRC passport when he was a citizen of that country. It is 
due to expire in October 2012. Due to his possession of a foreign passport that has not 
yet expired, AG ¶ 10(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 11 set forth conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security 
concerns. Two are potentially applicable here: 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(d) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2008, Applicant has not used his PRC passport 
to travel. He invalidated the PRC passport by cutting a piece from its cover. He only 
possesses the PRC passport so that he can obtain a visa the next time he travels to 
China. AG ¶¶ 11(c) and 11(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
 
10 
 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. I considered Applicant’s work history and professional skills. He is a 
dedicated and productive U.S. citizen. Although I decided this case against Applicant, 
this decision should not be construed as a reflection of his loyalty or patriotism to the 
U.S., as those matters are not at issue. Instead, the “clearly consistent with national 
interest” standard is a demanding benchmark that requires resolution of any doubt 
against Applicant. His close family ties in China, an authoritarian state controlled by the 
Chinese Communist Party, create such doubt.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Considering all the 
evidence, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference, but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
