KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence. 
In Guideline B cases, the nature of the foreign country and its intelligence gathering history
provide a context for evaluating record evidence.  There is a rebuttable presumption that an
applicant has ties of affection for his immediate in-laws.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-01470
DATE: 03/05/2012
DATE: March 5, 2012
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-01470
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 23, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992,
as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 29, 2011 after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process; whether
the Judge failed to consider all of the evidence; and whether the Judge failed properly to apply the
mitigating conditions.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline F are not at issue on this
appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant served in the Navy from
1980 to 1988, holding a security clearance the entire time without incident.  He enjoys an excellent
reputation for his character, integrity, work ethic, and patriotism.  Applicant’s wife was born in
Russia and lived most of her life there.  Applicant met her through an on-line dating service.
Applicant visited her in Russia both before and after their marriage, reporting his trips to his
employer.  
Applicant’s wife returned to Russia after their marriage because she had a good job and her
income was needed to address the couple’s financial problems.  She assisted Applicant in paying
off his past-due debts.  The couple have a daughter born in Russia.  Applicant’s wife and daughter
immigrated to the U.S. fairly recently, and the wife is a permanent resident of this country.  The
daughter holds dual citizenship.  The wife is transferring hundreds of thousands of dollars to the U.S.
The money is currently in a Russian bank account.
Applicant’s mother and father-in-law live in Russia.  They are both retired, and receive
pensions from the Russian government.  The parents’ circumstances are such that a reasonable
person could foresee that they, and consequently Applicant’s wife, might come to the attention of
the Russian government.  She speaks to her parents weekly, and she maintains regular contact with
two close friends who are residents and citizens of Russia.  
Russia and the U.S. engage in a policy of mutual cooperation in areas of shared interest.
However, Russia has a poor human rights record, its government infringes on the rights of its
citizens, and it targets the U.S. for intelligence gathering.
In the Analysis, the Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s committments to the U.S., his
service in the Navy while holding a security clearance, and his compliance with his employer’s
security procedures.  However, he also noted Applicant’s strong ties to Russia through his Russian
wife, who has only recently moved to the U.S.  Her parents and close friends live in Russia, she
maintains regular contact with them, and her life savings are in a Russian bank.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant’s parents circumstances suggest that they are vulnerable to “the whims of
the Russian government.”  Decision at 11.
Applicant states that, given the short amount of time he had to prepare, and the large amount
of evidence upon which the Government intended to rely, he was unable adequately to represent
himself or to hire a lawyer who could do so.   One month prior to the hearing, the Judge had sent
Applicant e-mails which advised him of the likely date of the hearing and contained prehearing
guidance.  The Judge also had advised Applicant that, if he had hired an attorney, the attorney
should be in touch with DOHA.  The Prehearing Guidance advised Applicant of his rights, including
his right to be represented by counsel, his right to present evidence and witnesses, and the procedure
to follow if he needed to request a continuance.  At the hearing, the Judge advised Applicant of the
procedures to be followed and specifically asked if Applicant was able to proceed.  Applicant stated
in the affirmative.  Tr. at 8.  Applicant offered several pieces of documentary evidence, all of which
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b): “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest
in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”
the Judge admitted, and he called a witness in his behalf as well as testifying himself.  The record
discloses no reason to believe that Applicant was denied the due process rights afforded by the
Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-04464 at 2 (App. Bd. May 8, 2009).  
Applicant cites to his evidence of good character and other favorable evidence, contending
that the Judge either did not consider it or that he failed properly to weigh the evidence.  A Judge
is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the record. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-10068
at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2011).  In this case, the Judge discussed Applicant’s favorable evidence.
However, his explanation for concluding that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion is
supported by the record that was before him.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the
Judge considered all of the record evidence.  Neither has he demonstrated that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
Applicant argues that, contrary to the Judge’s conclusion, the evidence establishes the criteria
of Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition 8(b).1  He cites to his testimony about his patriotism and
to his service in the Navy, his military decorations and awards, and favorable statements in the
Decision in support of his argument that his ties to the U.S. are deep and longstanding.  
The Judge was bound to consider the evidence which Applicant has cited, in addition to all
other record evidence.  However, in Guideline B cases the nature of the foreign government
involved and its intelligence gathering history provide a context for evaluating the record evidence.
In-laws represent a class of persons whom the Directive contemplates as presenting a potential
security risk.  There is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant has ties of affection for, or
obligation to, the immediate family members of his or he spouse.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-
06831 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2011).  In light of record evidence of Applicant’s ties in Russia, he
is vulnerable to foreign influence through his Russian wife, his parents-in-law’s circumstances, his
wife’s frequence contact with her parents and friends in Russia, and the nature of the Russian
government along with its intelligence gathering history.  The Judge’s analysis of Mitigating
Condition 8(b) is sustainable.   
Reviewing the Judge’s Decision in the context of the entire record, we conclude that the
Judge has examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
