 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-02488 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations and Drug Involvement 
concerns, but failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct concern. She has had numerous 
traffic violations over the past 13 years, principally involving speeding and driving with a 
suspended or revoked license. In spite of twice being arrested for driving on a 
suspended license and serving time in jail, she continues to violate traffic laws. Her last 
violation occurred a year ago and occurred after she completed a driver’s safety 
education course. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2010, Applicant submitted her security clearance application 
(SCA). On August 3, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her access to classified information 
due to the concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), H (Drug 
 
2 
 
 
Involvement), and E (Personal Conduct).1 On August 22, 2011, Applicant submitted her 
Answer and requested a hearing. 
 
 On September 30, 2011, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed. After coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for 
November 15, 2011.2 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
appeared at the hearing, testified, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through Q. 
These exhibits were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep 
the record open to provide her additional time to submit matters for my consideration. 
She timely submitted 12 documents, which were collectively marked as AE R and 
admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 28, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old senior manager, working for a federal contractor. She 
is a single mother with an eight year old child. She has overcome difficult situations, 
some of her own making and some outside of her control, to reach her current station in 
life. She is heavily involved in charitable work and has received considerable accolades 
for her endeavors on behalf of the less fortunate. She has been with her current 
employer for a little over two years and has received merit-based raises each year. Her 
coworkers and colleagues speak glowingly about her work performance and 
recommend her for a security clearance.3 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were due to the lack of child support and 
significant medical issues. She started resolving her financial problems in 2009 when 
she began her current job. She has slashed her living expenses and secured child 
support. These actions, in conjunction with her well-paying job, have allowed her to 
satisfy her past delinquent debts or bring the accounts current.  
 
The SOR alleges 15 debts totaling $8,280.50. Applicant has satisfied 12 of these 
debts, or $5,848.50 of the total amount previously outstanding. She has legitimate 
claims against the remaining three debts totaling $2,432, which she is disputing. She 
lives within her means, does not have credit cards, and has not accumulated any further 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
2
 Applicant received the Notice of Hearing (NOH) on November 3, 2011, but agreed to schedule 
the hearing a month before. At hearing, she waived the formal 15-day notice requirement and indicated 
she was prepared to proceed. Tr. at 7-8; E-mail from Department Counsel, dated October 13, 2011.  
 
3
 Tr. at 51-59; Answer; GE 1; GE 2; AE J; AE K; AE P; AE Q, at 18; AE R.1; AE R.2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
debt. She disclosed her financial problems on her SCA and discussed them with 
government investigators during her background interviews.4 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.o). 
 
 Applicant also self-reported that she experimented with marijuana on five 
separate occasions, with her last use occurring in approximately 2007. She discussed 
her past marijuana use with government investigators and has indicated on several 
occasions her intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. She is focused on creating a 
good life for her daughter and does not associate with those involved with illegal drugs.5 
(SOR ¶ 2.a).  
 
 Applicant has had numerous traffic violations over the past 13 years. In 1999, 
she was driving a car on a suspended driver’s license and fraudulently claimed to police 
to be her sister.6 (SOR ¶ 3.a). She continued to drive with a suspended license and was 
arrested in January and July 2002. She was convicted of both offenses and served time 
in jail for both convictions.7 (SOR ¶¶ 3.b – 3.c). Applicant was arrested in August 2002 
for violating the terms of her probation, and in December 2002 for reckless driving (85 
mph in a 55 mph zone). She was convicted of the reckless driving charge and received 
a suspended jail sentence.8 (SOR ¶¶ 3.b – 3.c). Despite these legal consequences, 
Applicant continues to violate traffic laws, including speeding and driving on a 
suspended or revoked license. At hearing, she explained that her recent citations for 
driving on a suspended or revoked license were a result of expired tags or other easily 
remedied issues. Once she resolved those issues, the citations were either dismissed 
or not prosecuted. In April 2010, she completed a Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) 
mandated driver’s safety education course. Yet, in October 2010, she was again cited 
for driving on a revoked or suspended license.9 (SOR ¶¶ 3.f – 3.i). During cross-
examination, Applicant admitted to committing other serious traffic violations from 2001 
to March 2011. Her March 2011 violation resulted in a conviction and fine.10 Applicant 
did not submit her current driving record or other documentation that her driving 
privileges have been reinstated.  
                                                          
4
 Tr. at 61-154, 196-197; Answer; GE 1; GE 2; AE A – AE I; AE K; AE P; AE Q at 18; AE R.3 – 
R.10. 
 
5
 Tr. at 155-160; Answer; GE 1; GE 2; AE R.11. 
 
6
 Tr. at 160-162; Answer; GE 2, Personal Conduct Interrogatory, Q. 2 and Subject Interview (SI), 
dated 1/25/11; GE 3. 
 
7
 Tr. at 162-165; Answer; GE 1; GE 2, 1/3/10 and 1/25/11 SI. 
 
8
 Tr. at 165-174; Answer; GE 3. 
 
9
 Tr. at 174-178; Answer; GE 3; AE R.12. In light of Applicant’s testimony, I find that she 
committed the driving with suspended or revoked license offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶ 3.f – 3.i. 
 
10
 Tr. at 182-188. I have only considered these matters in assessing Applicant’s case in 
mitigation. See generally ISCR Case No. 10-00922 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2011) (“It is appropriate for a 
Judge to consider conduct and matters not alleged in the SOR for such limited purposes as evaluating a 
claim of extenuation, mitigation or changed circumstances, and when weighing relevant and material 
information under the whole person concept.”). 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.11 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”12 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
11
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
12
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debt over a 
lengthy period of time directly implicates this concern and establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 An applicant may mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing 
one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. I have considered all the 
mitigating conditions and find that the following were established by the evidence: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were directly related to the lack of child 
support and significant medical issues. After starting her current job in 2009, she set on 
a course to resolve her debts to establish a better life for herself and her child. She has 
resolved the vast majority of her past debts by slashing living expenses and using the 
money saved, as well as the income from her new job, to satisfy her debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(d) apply. Applicant mitigated the financial considerations concern. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant’s past, limited use of marijuana raises the drug involvement concern 
and establishes AG ¶ 25(a), to wit: “any drug abuse.” 
 
 Applicant’s past marijuana use does not end the analysis, because AG ¶ 26 sets 
forth a number of mitigating conditions that could mitigate the drug involvement 
concern. The following two mitigating conditions warrant discussion: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant established both mitigating conditions. Her last use of marijuana was in 
2007. She demonstrated that she will not use marijuana or other illegal drugs in the 
future. She submitted a signed statement declaring that she understands any future 
drug use will result in automatic revocation of her clearance. She stated at hearing and 
throughout the security clearance investigation that she has no intent to use marijuana 
in the future. She has been honest throughout, including disclosing her past drug use 
and other adverse information on her SCA. I found her credible. She does not associate 
with those who use drugs and is focused on providing a good life for her daughter. AG 
¶¶ 26(a) and (b) apply. Applicant’s past illegal drug involvement no longer raises a 
security concern. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s long track record of serious traffic violations directly implicates the 
personal conduct concern, because it raises questions about her judgment.13 It also 
establishes the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant may mitigate the security concerns raised by her conduct by 
establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions and only the following is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s long track record of serious traffic violations is not minor. She went to 
jail on two separate occasions for driving on a suspended license and continues to 
routinely disregard traffic laws. She received two traffic citations following the 
completion of her DMV-mandated driver’s safety education course in April 2010. The 
most recent violation occurred just a year ago. Security clearance adjudications are “not 
an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability,” 
where an applicant’s past history is the best indicator of future conduct.14 Applicant’s 
                                                          
13
 See e.g. ISCR Case No. 10-09281 at 4 (App. Bd. March 5, 2012) (“the offenses of driving on a 
suspended license . . . are properly the subject of separate SOR allegations” under Guideline E). 
 
14
 ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) [citing to Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-529 (1988)].  
 
 
8 
 
 
past history leaves me with concerns that this type of misconduct will recur. Applicant 
failed to mitigate the personal conduct concern.15 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).16 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s charitable 
endeavors, medical issues, and significant strides she has made in resolving her 
financial situation. I also took into account Applicant’s honesty throughout the security 
clearance process, including admitting at hearing to driving offenses that were not 
alleged. However, considering Applicant’s lengthy record, including twice going to jail for 
driving on a suspended license, and her continuing refusal to comply with traffic laws, 
doubt about her good judgment remains. As noted above, any doubts concerning an 
applicant must be resolved in favor of national security. Accordingly, I find that the 
favorable whole-person factors present in this case do not outweigh the security 
concern raised by Applicant’s personal conduct. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:          For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.i:         Against Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
15
 Id. (upholding denial where applicant had a seven year track record of traffic violations). 
 
16
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
