KEYWORD: Guideline D; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s failure to list the applicable mitigating conditions is not harmful error. 
The Board does not review a Judge’s decision against a standard of perfection.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 11-03433.a1
DATE: 03/13/2012
DATE: March 13, 2012
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-03433
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
William S. Aramony, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 13, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Department Counsel requested a hearing.  On December 15, 2011, after the
hearing, Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s conclusions are
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s
unfavorable security clearance decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 41 years old.  He is married and
has two children.  Applicant admitted that he solicited prostitutes from December 2003 until 2008.
He spent approximately $10,000 for this activity.  Applicant met them at their home or in a hotel
room.  He explained that he started the activity when he was on work travel by going online and
looking for massage services.  When he spoke to an investigator in 2008, Applicant stated that he
would like to discontinue the “bad habit,” but he believed that there was the possibility that he would
solicit prostitutes in the future when he had a day off.  During a series of polygraphs dating from
2003, Applicant did not discuss his use of prostitutes when asked questions about his lifestyle.
During a 2008 polygraph, the polygrapher believed that he was not discussing something that had
to do with criminal activity.  At that point, Applicant responded that, for several years, he contacted
various agencies via the internet and made appointments to meet women at a hotel or residence.
Applicant did not disclose his activity with prostitutes to his wife until after he received the SOR
in July 2011.  They sought marriage counseling to heal their relationship.  However, after failing to
make contact with a counselor, they decided to seek “spiritual healing.”  They became members of
a church.  After their 2011 baptism, they will have access to counseling services from the church.
Applicant believed his activity was not a major crime.  It was against his marriage and not
really a concern for his security clearance.  He now realizes that the guidelines he violated are
serious in nature.  At the time of the misconduct, he did not believe he was putting his clearance in
jeopardy.  He believes he has mitigated the concern because he told the truth about the prostitution
in 2008 and his wife now knows about the situation.  Applicant believes this eliminates any
vulnerability.  He states that he has not engaged in activities of this nature since 2008.  He is
apologetic about his actions.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Under Guideline D, Applicant’s behavior is
not mitigated.  He has only recently acknowledged the behavior.  He has not received counseling.
His wife has just learned about the activity, but there are others who do not know.  The behavior was
not isolated in nature.  He did not believe it was a major crime that affected his security clearance.
Under Guideline E, Applicant used poor judgment and questionable behavior that is criminal in
nature.  He did nor disclose the behavior until after a series of polygraphs in 2008.  He was not
certain that he would not continue the behavior.  The security concern under personal conduct is not
mitigated.  He has minimized the seriousness of the conduct.  He recently expressed sorrow because
he needs his security clearance.  He told his wife after receiving the SOR.  Although he has
attempted to heal his marriage, he does not seem aware that he has violated a government trust.
3
There are doubts about whether he understands the seriousness of his activities and also about his
reliability and judgment.
 
Applicant asserts that the Judge focused on the disqualifying facts and either did not apply
pertinent mitigating conditions, or did not base her decision on a careful consideration of the facts
relevant to the mitigating conditions.  Applicant has failed to establish error on the part of the Judge.
There is a presumption in favor of regularity and good faith on the part of DOHA Judges as
they engage in the process of deciding cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0019 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov.
22, 1999).  Thus, there is a presumption that the Judge properly considered those mitigating
conditions in the Adjudicative Guidelines that were applicable to the case.  Similarly, a Judge is
presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he or she specifically states
otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).  Applicant fails to
overcome these presumptions.       
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.  A
review of the Judge’s decision reveals that, regarding Guideline D, the Judge listed the potentially
applicable mitigating conditions and then discussed several components of those factors in her
analysis.  Applicant is correct in pointing out that the Judge’s exposition of her analysis of the
mitigating conditions under Guideline E was more perfunctory.  The Judge did not list the
potentially applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E in her decision.  In this case it would
have been preferable for the Judge to list those conditions, as she did under Guideline D.  However,
the Board does not review a Judge’s decision against a standard of perfection.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 00-0311 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2001).  The Judge did offer a narrative explanation as to why
the disqualifying conduct was not mitigated, and, although her language did not track the precise
language contained in the Guideline E mitigating conditions, the Judge did offer a detailed
explanation as to why she had continuing doubts as to Applicant’s reliability and judgment, and she
based the lack of mitigation on those doubts.  The Board concludes that the Judge appropriately
weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the seriousness of the disqualifying
conduct and adequately discussed why the disqualifying conduct established under Guideline E  was
not mitigated.  Also, even assuming that the Judge’s analysis under Guideline E was flawed, her
findings and conclusions under Guideline D provide an adequate basis for her adverse security
clearance decision.  
1ISCR Case No. 97-0595 at 6 (App. Bd. May 22, 1998).
4
Applicant cites a prior Board decision for the proposition that it is improper for a DOHA
Judge to articulate a per se rule that certain disqualifying conduct cannot he mitigated.1  Applicant
then argues that the Judge in the instant case applied a per se rule when she stated with regard to
Guideline E, “None of the mitigating conditions apply under these circumstances.”  Given the
qualifying language “under these circumstances,” the statement, standing alone, does not constitute
the application of a per se rule.  Moreover, the Board does not consider portions, passages, or words
used in a decision in isolation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan 26, 2006).
The language cited by Applicant appeared at the end of a paragraph wherein she discusses in some
detail why Applicant’s conduct was not mitigated given the particular factual circumstances of the
case.  The Board concludes that Applicant did not improperly employ a per se rule.       
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
her decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
5
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
