 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01015 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 9, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On February 23, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on March 17, 2011.2
                                                          
1 Item 3 (SF 86), dated September 9, 2010. 
 On October 18, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
 
2 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 17, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 31, 2011. In a sworn 
statement, undated,3
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on January 5, 
2012, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the 
FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the FORM on January 18, 2012, and on February 6, 2012, he 
submitted one additional document to which Department Counsel had no objection. The 
case was assigned to me on March 9, 2012. 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nine (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., and 
1.i. through 1.m.) of the factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations of the 
SOR. Although he denied three of the allegations (¶¶ 1.c., 1.g., and 1.h.), he based his 
denials on his contention that they were actually duplicates of other accounts listed in 
the SOR.4
 
 He denied or was not responsive to the remaining allegations (¶¶ 1.f. and 
1.n.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since April 
2010, has been serving as an associate technician.5 He has never served with the U.S. 
military,6 and has never held a security clearance. 7 He is a June 1967 high school 
graduate.8
                                                          
3 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, undated). 
 No information was provided regarding Applicant’s early employment history. 
He was a sales associate from April 2003 until December 2004, a store manager from 
 
4 Applicant also admitted one account that he contended was a duplicate of another account alleged in the 
SOR.  
 
5 Item 3, supra note 1, at 15. As a result of this security clearance review action, Applicant was placed into 
an unpaid leave status, and commencing January 16, 2012, he is eligible to receive $230 per week in unemployment 
compensation. See Applicant Exhibit A (Monetary Benefit Determination, dated January 23, 2012). 
 
6 Item 3, at 21. 
 
7 Id. at 39. 
 
8 Id. at 13. 
 
3 
                                      
 
December 2004 until August 2009, and was unemployed from August 2009 until April 
2010.9
 
  
Applicant was married in July 1970 and divorced in July 2000.10 He married his 
second wife in November 2002.11 He has two children from his first marriage, born in 
July 1973, and May 1976, respectively.12
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until 2007, when he 
started to build his “dream house.” Both he and his wife were employed at the time, and 
they took out a $260,000 construction loan to build the residence. Quotations for 
construction and supplies were anticipated to be sufficient to build the house. However, 
as the national economy decreased, his costs increased. The 12-month project actually 
took 15 months, and the additional costs exhausted his emergency savings to a point 
where he had to resort to his credit cards to finance the remainder of the project.13 Once 
the residence was completed in 2008, Applicant had sufficient funds to pay his 
mortgage, tax, and living expenses,14 but he did not have enough to make all his other 
debt payments. He paid some accounts one month, and switched to other accounts the 
next month. As a result, accounts started to become delinquent, and were placed for 
collection or charged off.15
 
 
In August 2009, according to Applicant, on his doctor’s advice, Applicant quit his 
job because of the stress and anxiety it was causing him.16 While quitting his job may 
have reduced Applicant’s stress and anxiety, it also increased his financial difficulties. 
Because he voluntarily left his job, Applicant was not eligible for unemployment 
compensation.17 Applicant claimed his wife spoke with a debt consolidation company in 
2008, but they never used the agency. He also claimed that in 2009, he and his wife 
contacted an attorney to explore a bankruptcy filing, but that too was never 
consummated. In early 2010, he again met with an attorney regarding a bankruptcy, but 
no such action took place.18
                                                          
9 Id. at 15-20. 
 Applicant could not recall the names of the agency or the 
 
10 Id. at 25-26. 
 
11 Id. at 24-25. 
 
12 Id. at 29. 
 
13 Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 4, 2010, at 1-2), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories. 
  
14 Id. at 2. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Id. at 2, 4-5. 
 
17 Id. at 2. 
 
18 Id. at 2-3. 
 
4 
                                      
 
attorneys, and he did not submit any documentation to support his claims. In October 
2010, Applicant indicated he would meet with an attorney in the spring of 2011 to go 
over his options.19 He has not submitted any documentation to reflect that he did so. In 
February 2012, he stated he would be meeting with an attorney to again review his 
options.20
 
 Applicant has offered no evidence to indicate that he has ever received 
financial counseling in money management, debt management, debt repayment, or 
budgeting.  
Applicant stated that if he chooses to not file for bankruptcy, he will pay all of his 
creditors.21 His contention that he is willing to work out payment plans with his creditors, 
but that they are not interested in doing so and only want the entire unpaid balances, is 
not entirely accurate, for at least one creditor (SOR ¶ 1.e.), as discussed further below, 
was willing to reduce the balance by nearly 50 percent.22
 
  
Applicant and his wife started two part-time businesses to generate money. They 
sell old automotive brochures on the internet, but that activity has only generated 
$1,000 to 2,000 per year.23 He also turned his residence into a bed and breakfast lodge, 
and in $2009, it generated $5,000.24 His joint federal income tax return for 2009 reflects 
an adjusted gross income of $47,175.25
 
 
In March 2011, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting a 
net monthly income of $1,517.54, including his salary, his spouse’s salary, and other 
unspecified income.26 He claimed $590 in monthly expenses, as well as $2,898.60 in 
debt payments and mortgage payments.27
 
 Using his numbers, he does not have 
anything left over each month for discretionary spending or savings.  
The SOR identified 13 purportedly continuing delinquencies, totaling 
approximately $130,451. A closer review and analysis of the SOR allegations and 
Applicant’s credit cards reveal that some of the accounts reflected in the SOR are 
                                                          
19 Id. at 3. 
 
20 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 5. 
 
21 Item 4, supra note 13, at 3. 
 
22 Id. at 4. 
 
23 Id. 
 
24 Id. 
 
25 Item 4 (Form 1040, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories.  
 
26 Item 4 (Personal Financial Statement, dated March 17, 2011), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories. In May 2011, Applicant’s net income was scheduled to increase once he starts receiving Social 
Security benefits. 
 
27 Id. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
actually the same as other accounts alleged, simply under a different creditor or 
collection agent name, or with a different account number.28
 
  
There is a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.a.) that started with one particular bank, 
was transferred to a second bank, and then transferred to a third bank, with a high 
credit of $17,422, that was over 180 days past due, and placed for collection and 
charged off, before being sold, first to one debt purchaser and then to another company. 
The current delinquent balance is approximately $19,000. There is no evidence that 
Applicant made any effort to resolve this account, and it remains unresolved. 
 
There is a retail store credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.b.) with a high credit of 
$20,077, that was placed for collection and charged off, before being sold, first to one 
debt purchaser and then to another company. The current delinquent balance is 
approximately $22,000. There is no evidence that Applicant made any effort to resolve 
this account, and it remains unresolved. 
 
There is a bank credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.m.) that was over 180 days past 
due, and placed for collection, in the amount of $11,000, and charged off, before being 
sold to a debt purchaser in June 2011. The debt purchaser, the same one that 
purchased other accounts from the same creditor listed in the SOR, reported the 
account in September 2011, with a different account number (SOR ¶ 1.c.). The current 
delinquent balance is approximately $11,000. Although Department Counsel argued 
that Applicant’s contention that the SOR allegations referred to the same account was 
not supported by sufficient documentation, based on the quality of the Government 
exhibits in issue, I have concluded that these two accounts are the same. Nevertheless, 
there is no evidence that Applicant made any effort to resolve this account, and it 
remains unresolved. 
 
There is a bank credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.d.), with a high credit of $5,944, 
that was placed for collection and charged off, before being sold, first to one debt 
purchaser and then to another company. The current delinquent balance is 
approximately $4,869. Applicant contends the account is the same as that alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h., but Department Counsel argued that Applicant’s contention that the SOR 
allegations referred to the same account was not supported by sufficient documentation. 
There is no mention of that particular creditor referred to in SOR ¶ 1.h. in any of the 
three credit reports submitted by the Government, and the only evidence regarding the 
account comes from Applicant. Based on the evidence, I have concluded that these two 
accounts are the same. Nevertheless, there is no evidence that Applicant made any 
effort to resolve this account, and it remains unresolved. 
 
There is a bank credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.e.), with a high credit of $14,560, 
that was initially $547 past due, that was placed for collection and charged off. The 
                                                          
28 Special attention was focused on the following sources: Item 2 (Debt list, undated), wherein Applicant 
furnished a chronology for several of the various accounts, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; Item 7 
(Combined Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion Credit Report, dated September 22, 2010); Item 6 (Equifax Credit 
Report, dated March 28, 2011); Item 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, with attached enclosures); and Item 5 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated October 11, 2011). 
 
6 
                                      
 
current delinquent balance is approximately $14,000, although the current collection 
agent offered to settle the account for $7,398.46 in February 2011. There is no evidence 
that Applicant made any effort to resolve this account, and it remains unresolved. 
 
There is a bank account (SOR ¶ 1.f.) with a past-due balance of $3,538 that was 
charged off. Department Counsel argued that Applicant had admitted the allegation, but 
that argument is inaccurate. Applicant’s response to the allegation was a denial, based 
on the fact that he never had an account with that particular creditor and had never 
dealt with it.29 While the account is listed in the March 2011 Equifax credit report,30
 
 it is 
not listed in the October 2011 credit report. Although it is unclear if Applicant made any 
effort to follow up on the account, it appears from the Government’s most current 
evidence that the account has been deleted from the credit report, and I conclude that 
this account has been resolved. 
There is a charge account (SOR ¶ 1.l.), with a high credit of $6,500, that was 
over 150 days past due, and placed for collection, in the amount of $8,192, and charged 
off, before being sold, in turn, to various debt purchasers. A law firm representing the 
most recent debt purchaser identified the initial creditor and a collection agent and 
indicated the unpaid balance was $8,023.12 as of January 17, 2011.31
 
 The account, 
with a different account number, with a high credit of $8,192 and an unpaid balance of 
$8,023, is listed with a variation of the same initial creditor in the September 2010 credit 
report and in the October 2011 credit report (SOR ¶ 1.g.). Although Department 
Counsel argued that Applicant’s contention that the SOR allegations referred to the 
same account was not supported by sufficient documentation and the accounts had 
different account numbers, based on the evidence, I have concluded that these two 
accounts are the same. Applicant contends that his wife’s wages are being garnished, 
and that as of October 27, 2011, the account balance has been reduced.  His 
contention is not supported by any documentation to reflect a garnishment action. 
Accordingly, there is insufficient evidence to indicate Applicant is in the process of 
resolving this account, and it remains unresolved. 
There is a bank credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.i.) that was placed for collection, 
with an unpaid balance of approximately $3,476.82, and sold, in turn to several different 
debt purchasers. The current delinquent balance is approximately $3,563.08. Although 
the account does not appear in any of the credit reports, Applicant admitted the account 
is his and it remains unpaid. There is no evidence that Applicant made any effort to 
resolve this account, and it remains unresolved. 
 
There is a bank credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.j.) that was placed for collection, 
with an unpaid balance of approximately $10,468.03, and sold, in turn to several 
different debt purchasers. The current delinquent balance is approximately $11,392.29. 
Although the account does not appear in any of the credit reports, Applicant admitted 
                                                          
29 Item 2, supra note 3, at 5. 
 
30 Item 6, supra note 28, at 2. 
 
31 Item 4 (Letter from Law Firm, dated January 17, 2011), attached to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
the account is his and it remains unpaid. There is no evidence that Applicant made any 
effort to resolve this account, and it remains unresolved. 
 
There is a bank credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.k.) that started with one particular 
bank, was transferred to a second bank, and then transferred to a third bank, with a 
high credit of $3,000, that was placed for collection and sold, in turn to several different 
debt purchasers and transferred to several different collection attorneys. The delinquent 
balance, as of January 2011, was approximately $11,957.18. The account still appears 
in the October 2011 credit report under the name of the third creditor, and Applicant 
admitted the account is his. There is no evidence that Applicant made any effort to 
resolve this account, and it remains unresolved. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”32 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”33
 
   
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”34
                                                          
32 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
 
33 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
34 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
 
8 
                                      
 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.35
 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”36
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”37
 
 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
35 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
36 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
37 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. In 2008, Applicant had sufficient funds to pay his mortgage, tax, and 
living expenses, but he did not have enough to make all his other debt payments. He 
paid some accounts one month, and switched to other accounts the next month. As a 
result, accounts started to become delinquent, and were placed for collection or 
charged off. In August 2009, Applicant quit his job, with the result that his financial 
difficulties increased. His financial difficulties remain unresolved. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) 
apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@38
 
  
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. The nature, frequency, and relative recency of 
Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 2008 make it difficult to conclude that it 
occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” In light of his substantial period of 
continuing financial problems, it is unlikely that they will be resolved in the short term, 
                                                          
38 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
and they are likely to continue. Accordingly, Applicant failed to mitigate his financial 
situation, and under the circumstances, his actions do cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.39
 
   
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. While Applicant’s initial decision to obtain a 
$260,000 construction loan to build his “dream house” was not necessarily the wrong 
decision because quotations for construction and supplies were anticipated to be 
sufficient to build the house. However, as the national economy decreased, his costs 
increased to unanticipated levels.  Faced with continuing financial problems, Applicant 
nevertheless exacerbated those problems when he gave up his job because of the 
stress and anxiety the job was causing him. As a result, he was unemployed from 
August 2009 until April 2010. It is unclear if the increase of construction costs and 
supplies could have been mitigated to any degree if Applicant had chosen to downgrade 
or delay his construction plans, or if his stress and anxiety could have been prevented 
with medication. Under these circumstances it is questionable if Applicant acted 
responsibly.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there is no evidence to indicate Applicant 
has ever received counseling in money management, debt management, debt 
repayment, or budgeting.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. 
Applicant’s statements regarding his future intent to resolve his debts in the event he 
does not file for bankruptcy, without corroborating documentary evidence, are entitled to 
little weight.40
 
 His declaration of future intention to resolve his debts, after so much time 
where no positive efforts were taken, does not qualify as a “good-faith” effort.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
39 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
40 See ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). 
 
11 
                                      
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.41
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct: His financial 
difficulties were caused, in part, because the quotations for construction and supplies 
that were anticipated to be sufficient to build his house increased to unanticipated levels 
as the national economy decreased.  He was also faced with stress and anxiety on his 
job, and he was unemployed from August 2009 until April 2010. 
       
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
When he completed the construction of his house in 2008, Applicant had sufficient 
funds to pay his mortgage, tax, and living expenses, but he did not have enough to 
make all his other debt payments. Accounts started to become delinquent, and were 
placed for collection or charged off. In August 2009, Applicant quit his job without having 
explored other options, and remained unemployed for several months. Although he 
claimed he or his wife spoke with a debt consolidation company and two attorneys over 
the ensuing years, Applicant could not recall the names of the agency or the attorneys, 
and he did not submit any documentation to support his claims. He has discussed 
bankruptcy before, and still entertains that possibility.  Applicant could have made some 
reasonable timely efforts to resolve his accounts, but he has not done so. Applicant’s 
actions indicate poor self-control and a lack of judgment, which raise questions about 
his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 
2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant (See ¶ 1.m.) 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant (See ¶ 1.l.) 
 Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant (See ¶ 1.d.) 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
41 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
