 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 11-02566                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                    Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 2, 2010. On November 17, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 15, 2011, DOHA received Applicant’s written answer to the SOR. 
Applicant elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on January 23, 2012. I convened a hearing on February 13, 2012, to 
 
2 
 
 
consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced 
seven exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 7 and entered in the record without 
objection. Applicant testified and called one witness. He introduced three exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through C and entered in the record 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 22, 2012. 
 
                                                     Procedural Matters 
 
 The Government requested correction of a spelling error in SOR allegation ¶1.a. 
There was no objection to the Government’s request, which was granted. As corrected, 
SOR allegation ¶1.a. reads: “You failed to file your 2010 tax return for the state of 
[deleted].”  
 
 Pursuant to ¶ E3.1.8. of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, Applicant confirmed that he 
was notified at least 15 days in advance of his hearing, and he believed he had 
adequate time to prepare his case. (Tr. 12-14.)   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 14 allegations of financial conduct that raise security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.n.) In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted 13 allegations. He denied the SOR allegation at ¶ 1.g. 
Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and employed as a pricing manager by a government 
contractor. In 1998, he earned a bachelor’s degree. He seeks a security clearance for 
the first time.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant has experience as a professional financial analyst. From June 2006 
until June 2008, Applicant worked as a senior financial systems analyst. He left that 
position after being offered a higher-paying job with another company. However, the 
company withdrew the job offer after it reviewed Applicant’s credit situation. Applicant 
has worked for his current employer since September 2008. (Ex. 1; Tr. 61.) 
    
 Applicant married for the first time in June 1999. Applicant has two children from 
his first marriage. He and his wife divorced in May 2005. Applicant remarried in 
December 2011. (Ex. 1; Tr. 42.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately $67,000. The 
Government conceded that the $269 debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.e. were one 
and the same. Additionally, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided 
documentation corroborating that the $2,384 judgment alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. had been 
vacated. (Ex. 4; Tr. 55-57, 115.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Six of the alleged debts are in collection status: SOR ¶ 1.b. ($289); SOR ¶ 1.c. 
($59,320);1 SOR ¶ 1.d. ($269); SOR ¶ 1.f. ($753); SOR ¶ 1.i. ($651); and SOR ¶ 1.j. 
($100). The $2,384 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h. is 120 days past due.  (SOR) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant failed to file his 2010 tax return in his state 
of residence (SOR ¶ 1.a.). At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he filed his 2010 
tax return in October 2011. When asked why he waited so long to file the return, 
Applicant stated: “Well, quite frankly, I just had other things going on and just 
procrastinating with the filing of it.” He added: “And, also since I didn’t owe anything, I 
just felt that there wasn’t - - well. I’ve always known that there wasn’t a penalty as long 
as you don’t owe as long as you file within three years of the tax return.” (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 Applicant also failed to timely file his 2008 state and federal income tax returns. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.k. and 1.l.) Applicant explained that he didn’t pay his income taxes because 
he had lost a job and concentrated his energies on trying to find another job. He also 
acknowledged that he was planning to take a vacation and did not want to use his 
money to pay an accountant to prepare his tax returns. (Tr. 64-65, 67-69.) 
 
 Applicant reported that his 2008 state and federal income taxes had been 
satisfied. However, he failed to provide documentation to corroborate his assertion. (Tr. 
75.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant failed to pay his 1999 state income taxes in 
2000 (SOR ¶ 1.m.). He stated that the 1999 state income tax debt had been satisfied, 
but he failed to provide documentation to corroborate his statement. (Tr. 75-76.) 
 
 Finally, the SOR alleged that Applicant was evicted from his residence for failure 
to pay rent in about March 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.n.) Applicant explained that he had been laid 
off from a job in 2002 and didn’t have money to pay his rent. (Tr. 76.) 
 
 Applicant has not resolved the financial delinquencies alleged on the SOR. He 
provided an exhibit entitled “2012 Budgeted Projections” in which he detailed his plans 
for satisfying his debts during 2012. He has remitted payment or partial payment on only 
one account alleged on the SOR: he stated that in January 2012, he made his first 
payment of $452 on his $60,224 delinquent student loan account.2 However, the 
documentation he provided did not corroborate payment. (Ex. A; Ex. C; Tr. 52.) 
 
 Applicant’s current annual salary is $81,700. His monthly net income is $3,400, 
after $600 in child support for his two children is deducted. Applicant’s wife has an 
annual salary of $48,000. Applicant has not had financial credit counseling. (Tr. 88-90, 
113.)  
                                            
1 This debt arose because Applicant has not repaid student loans he took out during his undergraduate 
studies. (Tr. 91-92.) 
 
2 Applicant’s student loan debt dates to 1998, when he graduated from college. (Tr. 91-92.) 
 
4 
 
 
 A coworker who has worked with Applicant for three years testified as a 
character witness. He stated that Applicant has a reputation at work for honesty. He 
further stated that he believed Applicant to be trustworthy and professional. (Tr. 96-
108.) 
 
                                                 Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
 
6 
 
 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties and inattention to his financial 
responsibilities. Applicant and his wife have a combined annual income of 
approximately $129,000. Three of the debts alleged on the SOR are for less than $300. 
One of those debts is for $100. 
 
 Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts total approximately $67,000. Over 
$60,000 of Applicant’s indebtedness arises from his student loan debt, which dates to 
1998. He failed to provide documentation showing that his debts were resolved or 
otherwise satisfied. The record reflects that the 12 of the delinquencies alleged on the 
SOR remain unpaid and have occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur. 
Applicant has not had financial counseling, and he lacks a clear and timely strategy for 
resolving his delinquent debts.   
 
At his hearing, Applicant proposed a plan for paying his delinquent debts at some 
time in the future. In determining an individual's security worthiness, the Government 
cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her outstanding 
debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999). 
Accordingly, I conclude that none of the Guideline F mitigating conditions fully applies to 
the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 37 
years. His professional training is in finance and financial analysis. His financial 
problems began several years ago and are ongoing. Despite these financial problems, 
he has failed to take an interest in and carry out his financial obligations. He has not 
taken affirmative action to live within his means and to pay or resolve his delinquent 
debts. His lack of attention to his financial delinquencies continues to raise security 
concerns. Despite a steady income for several years, he has failed to budget his income 
to satisfy his many debts, some of which are small, and he has not sought credit 
counseling. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                 Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h. - 1.n.:   Against Applicant     
 
                                          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
