 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02793 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jefferys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 16, 2010. On October 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. In issuing the SOR, DOHA acted pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On November 11, 2011, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2011. 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA issued the Notice of Hearing on January 26, 2012. The hearing was held as 
scheduled on February 15, 2012. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
called two witnesses to testify, and offered exhibits (AE) A through S that were admitted 
without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on March 6, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old computer technician who works for a defense 
contractor. He has worked at his current job for a series of different defense contractors 
since December 2004. He earned a bachelor’s degree in electronics in 1999. He is 
divorced and has two daughters, ages 20 and 26. His daughters live with him, and he 
supports them. He served in the U.S. Army from February 1979 to December 2003 and 
retired in the grade of sergeant first class (E-7). He has held a security clearance over 
30 years without incident. In the Army, he was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal, 
four Army Commendation Medals, and three Army Achievement Medals.1 
 
The SOR lists seven delinquent debts totaling $91,077. In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted each of the delinquent debts. His admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact.2  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to being the victim of a Ponzi scheme. 
In early 2007, a friend recommended that he invest in a specific company. He received 
a sales pitch from a representative of the company and consulted with two church 
pastors about the company. The pastors advised him that the company was legitimate 
and its investment methods were legal. The company supposedly generated money 
through a foreign currency money market.3 
 
From January to April 2007, Applicant obtained cash advances on several credit 
cards totaling $116,025 and invested that money with the company. The SOR debts are 
those credit card accounts. From this investment, he was supposed to receive $6,000 in 
July 2007 and $8,500 per month thereafter as long as he kept that amount of money 
invested in the company. In May 2007, the U.S. Justice Department (DOJ) shut down 
the company and froze its assets. The DOJ notified Applicant that he was a possible 
victim of fraud. Three of the key management officials of the company were arrested, 
charged, and convicted of federal offenses arising from this fraud. In December 2010, 
two of the officials were sentenced to 27 years in prison and the third was sentenced to 
30 years. The federal judge who presided over the criminal trial indicated that these 
criminals preyed upon individuals using their faith and targeted the military and 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-8, 39, 68-71, 97-99; GE 1, 2. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3-5. 
3 Tr. 17, 27-28, 31-34, 50-51; GE 2; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
upstanding citizens. It was reported that 7,000 people invested about $82 million in this 
fraudulent scheme.4 
 
Even after the investment company was shut down, Applicant continued making 
credit card payments towards the cash advances. In December 2008, he consulted with 
a credit repair company that advised him to stop making payments towards those credit 
card accounts, allow them to be placed for collection, not to reply to any judgments, and 
not to make any court appearances in judgment proceedings. He paid the credit repair 
company $1,500 and was told it would handle everything. After about two years, he 
became dissatisfied with the credit repair company and began working with another 
credit repair company. He indicated that he quickly realized the second company was 
no better than the first. In January 2011, he consulted with a credit counseling service 
and began working with the creditors to establish a debt consolidation program. In July, 
2011, he paid over $7,600 towards the delinquent accounts. He was able to settle two 
accounts. However, one creditor was not interested in participating in a debt 
consolidation program and obtained a writ of execution to satisfy its debt. This writ 
authorized the local sheriff to seize Applicant’s assets to satisfy the debt. The writ made 
debt consolidation a less desirable option and bankruptcy, which automatically stays 
collection actions, the preferred alternative.5 
 
In July 2011, Applicant consulted with a bankruptcy attorney. He filed a Chapter 
13 bankruptcy petition in September 2011. The petition indicated that his total assets 
were $200,250 and his total liabilities were $305,874. The alleged debts are listed in the 
petition. At the hearing, the bankruptcy attorney testified that the Meeting of the 
Creditors has occurred. No objections have yet been filed to the proposed Chapter 13 
Plan and the attorney expects the court will approve the plan. Under the proposed plan, 
Applicant will pay $1,400 per month to the bankruptcy trustee for 57 months. So far, he 
has made five monthly payments from October 2011 to February 2012 to the trustee. At 
the time of the hearing, he has made all required payments under the proposed plan. As 
part of this bankruptcy, he also completed a financial management course.6 
 
The assets seized from the investment company have been turned over to a 
receiver. Applicant and approximately 4,000 other individuals have filed claims with the 
receiver. The receiver has proposed a plan for distributing the assets, which a federal 
district court must approve. A hearing on objections to the distribution plan was set for 
September 2011. The notice for that hearing provided: 
 
The Receiver intends to make an initial distribution of $19 million to those 
claimants determined to be eligible for an initial distribution. A second 
much smaller distribution will occur in the future. This Plan adopts the 
                                                          
4 Tr. 28-33, 50-51, 73-76, 90-93; GE 2; AE A, B, L. 
5 Tr. 16-17, 35-42, 51-55, 77-81, 83-87; GE 2; AE C-F.  
6 Tr. 29, 40-50, 54-57, 81, 88-90; GE 2; AE G, K, N-S. 
 
4 
 
 
Rising Tide theory of distribution which will return more money to 
Claimants who never received any money or other benefits from the 
[company].  
 
Applicant anticipates that he will receive about 50% of his investment, i.e., $58,000, 
from the receiver. He does not know when the funds will be disbursed. His bankruptcy 
attorney testified that, based on his experience, the amount returned to investors from 
such crimes is generally only about 10% of the money invested. Upon receipt of those 
funds, Applicant indicated that he and his attorney will confer with the trustee on how 
best to apply them to the delinquent debts.7 
 
Prior to being a victim of this fraud, Applicant stated he never had any delinquent 
debts. He indicated that he is meeting his current living expenses. He has about $7,900 
in his checking account and $16,000 in cash at another location. In July 2011, he 
submitted a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that reflected his net monthly income 
was $7,044, his total monthly expenses were $1,618, and his monthly debt payments 
were $2,241, which left him a net monthly remainder of $3,184. His PFS was submitted 
before his bankruptcy and did not include payments to the trustee. However, even 
considering the monthly bankruptcy payments, he is still able to save money each 
month.8 
 
A former coworker testified on Applicant’s behalf. She has known him since 
2002. They served in the Army together. They also worked together as security guards. 
She trusts him and believes he is an honest individual. He received an “excellent” rating 
on his last job performance evaluation. Last month, he received the Tech of the Month 
award.9 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
                                                          
7 Tr. 28-29, 43, 73, 75-76, 95; GE 2; AE B, M. 
8 Tr. 35-42, 57-58, 68-73, 81-82; GE 2; AE H-K. 
9 Tr. 58-68, 98-100; GE 2 
 
5 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant was the victim of a Ponzi scheme. In early 2007, he obtained $116,000 
in cash advances on credit cards that he invested in the fraudulent scheme. Thousands 
of people who invested millions of dollars were victims of this fraud. All of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts pertain to the Ponzi scheme. He has no other delinquent debts. His 
financial problems involve this isolated incident. More specifically, these problems arose 
under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant voluntarily made the decision to invest in the Ponzi scheme. Although 
pastors and others recommended this investment, he should have exercised greater 
diligence in investigating the company before investing in it. In particular, with its 
marketed yearly return on investment of nearly 90%, this company’s legitimacy should 
have been questioned. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Nevertheless, he has learned a 
difficult lesson from this incident and will be more cautious in the future.         
 
 Even after he became aware that he was the victim of the fraudulent scheme, 
Applicant continued making payments on the credit card accounts for about 20 months. 
In December 2008, he consulted a credit repair company that advised him to stop 
making payments on those credit cards and to allow them to be placed in a collection 
status. About two years later, he became dissatisfied with that credit repair company 
and eventually consulted with a credit counseling service. Following the advice of the 
credit counseling service, he contacted the creditors and attempted to establish a debt 
consolidation program. In July 2011, he paid about $7,600 to the creditors. One creditor, 
however, was not interested in participating in such a program and obtained a Writ of 
Execution to seize his assets. After consulting with an attorney, he filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy to obtain the automatic stay of that collection action. Since then, he has 
made all of the required payments under his proposed bankruptcy plan. His attorney 
expects that the plan will be approved by the trustee. Under that plan, Applicant will pay 
$1,400 per month for 57 months. Given his current budget, he is able to make those 
payments. Overall, he has shown that he is committed to resolving his delinquent debts. 
There are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
8 
 
 
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. I have considered Applicant’s service in the Army and 
his subsequent employment with defense contractors. His financial problems are 
attributable to him being the victim of a fraudulent scheme. In December 2008, he 
received questionable advice from a credit repair company that told him to stop making 
payments on his credit card debts. This resulted in him becoming delinquent on the 
alleged debts. Later, he received credit counseling and attempted to resolve these 
debts. One creditor obtained a Writ of Execution that caused him to file Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. Since then, he has made all of the required bankruptcy payments. A 
receiver is liquidating assets seized from the fraudulent investment company. Applicant 
anticipates that he will receive funds from the receiver. He plans to consult with his 
bankruptcy attorney about how best to apply any funds he receives from the receiver to 
the delinquent debts. Throughout these events, he has been persistent in attempting to 
resolve his delinquent debts.     
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g: For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
