 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03401 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance questionnaire on April 3, 2007. On 
September 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 26, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his case 
be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on December 15, 2011. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on 
December 20, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on January 4, 2012. He had 30 days 
to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit additional information. On 
February 24, 2012, the case was forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned to 
me on February 27, 2012.   
 
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all SOR allegations. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old male employed by a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance.  He has been employed with the company since 
April 2007. Applicant also has a side business repairing swimming pools. He is divorced 
and has two adult sons. (Item 5)   
 
After Applicant completed his security clearance questionnaire, a background 
investigation was initiated. His background investigation revealed five delinquent 
accounts, an approximate total balance of $63,787. (Items 8, 9 and 10) The delinquent 
accounts include: an $11,663 delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR 
¶ 1.a: Item 8 at 1; Item 9 at 1; Item 10 at 7); an $8,890 delinquent account with a bank 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 8 at 1; Item 9 at 1; Item 10 at 9); a $16,072 
delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 8 at 2; Item 10 at 
8); a $22,522 delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 8 at 
2; Item 7 at 3); and a real estate mortgage that was at least 90 days delinquent in 
August 2010 in the amount of $4,640 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 8 at 2).   
 
On October 18, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by the investigator conducting 
his background investigation. He admitted three delinquent credit card accounts which 
are the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c were credit card accounts that he opened for his swimming pool repair business. 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was a credit card account for his personal use. Applicant 
began to have financial problems in 2009 when his swimming pool business slowed 
down. His income from the business dropped from $2,000 a month to $200 a month. He 
was unable to pay his bills. He does not believe the debts were caused by 
circumstances beyond his control. He admits that he spent more than he earned. He 
indicated that he intended to pay his delinquent debts. He was thinking about paying off 
the debts with a loan from his 401(k) account. (Item 6 at 4-5) 
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $3,270. He earns $400 a month from his 
swimming pool business and $350 a month from a roommate. His total net monthly 
income is $4,020.  He states that he is current on his mortgage. His mortgage payment 
is $1,540. Other expenses include a truck loan for $278, and a boat loan for $202. His 
monthly expenses also include: $240 groceries, $30 clothing, $300 utilities, $400 car 
expenses, $62 life insurance, $200 entertainment. After expenses, he has 
approximately $767 left over each month in discretionary income. (Item 6 at 5)  
 
In August 2011, Applicant answered interrogatories that asked him about the 
status of his delinquent debts. He indicated that he reached a settlement agreement to 
pay the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He attached a copy of the agreement to his answer 
 
3 
 
 
to the interrogatory. He agreed to pay $4,360 on July 18, 2011, and $125 on the 15th of 
each month until the judgment and the post-judgment interest are paid in full. He did not 
provide proof that he was making payments in accordance with the agreement. He 
indicated that he was unable to resolve the remaining delinquent accounts. He is still 
trying to put his financial problems in order and needs more time to get his financial 
matters resolved. (Item 7) He did not submit additional matters for consideration in his 
answer to the SOR (Item 4) or in response to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
when evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c), (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that he has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past several years. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant recently entered into a repayment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but  
did not provide proof that he is actually making payments in accordance with the plan. 
His other delinquent debts remain unresolved. Applicant’s extensive unresolved debt 
indicates irresponsible behavior and continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant’s pool business 
suffered a downturn in 2009. However, he has not demonstrated that he acted 
 
5 
 
 
responsibly under the circumstances. He admits that his financial problems are mostly 
caused by his overspending. I cannot conclude that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant did not attend financial counseling. All of the delinquent debts 
remained unresolved at the close of the record. Applicant’s financial situation is unlikely 
to be resolved in the near future.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the settlement agreement he entered 
into regarding the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. However, he did not provide proof that he 
was making the payments under the agreement. He has not taken steps to resolve his 
other delinquent accounts. Overall, he has not initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his 
debts.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment history with a defense contractor. I considered that a business downturn 
contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. Regardless of these factors, Applicant 
admits to overextending himself. He is given credit for entering into a repayment 
agreement for one debt, but did not provide proof that he was, in fact, making the 
payments under the terms of the agreement. He has not taken steps to resolve his other 
delinquent accounts.   
 
 
6 
 
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which 
raises questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. In other words, if an individual has trouble managing their 
finances, this can raise doubts about an individual’s ability to handle and protect 
classified information. Applicant’s history of financial problems raises doubts about his 
ability to handle and protect classified information. Mindful of my duty to resolve cases 
where there is doubt in favor of national security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the 
concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
