KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: It was not error for the Judge to decline to leave the record open to accept documents
from the Applicant, when the Judge accepted Applicant’s testimony on the issue to which the
documents pertained and ultimately made findings consistent with Applicant’s representations
about the documents.  The Judge’s weighing of the mitigating evidence in the case was
supported by the record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-03755.a1
DATE: 03/14/2012
DATE: March 14, 2012
In Re:
---------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-03755
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 7, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On December 29, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Mark Harvey
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge erred by not considering
written documents pertaining to Applicant’s negotiations with creditors; and whether the Judge’s
adverse security decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the
Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 35 years old.  He married in
2001, was separated from his spouse in 2008, and was divorced in 2011.  Applicant’s SOR lists five
debts totaling $128,547.  At that time, he had four delinquent credit card debts totaling $25,547, and
a home equity account in the amount of $103,000.  In 2008, the $103,000 home equity debt was
resolved through a short sale.  After Applicant’s separation from his wife, she stopped contributing
to the mortgage payments.  Applicant met with a divorce lawyer in February 2008, who told him to
stop making payments on his credit card debts until after his divorce was final.  Applicant’s ex-wife
discharged her debts through bankruptcy.  The divorce was final in March 2011.  Applicant entered
into negotiations with two of the creditors, but the payments they were seeking were more than
Applicant could afford.  In May 2011, Applicant had a net income of $2,988 per month, monthly
expenses of $2,570, debt payments of $340 to a $60,000 student loan, and a net remainder of $78.
He had no assets, and no debt payments were being made to SOR creditors.  Applicant also had a
child support obligation of $300 per month.  At the time of the hearing, Applicant indicated that he
was attempting to negotiate payment of his delinquent debts, and that he had been in contact with
several creditors.  Although he did not provide written evidence of any negotiations such as offers
and counter-offers, his statements about the ongoing negotiations are accepted as credible.  He has
not paid his four SOR listed creditors anything for at least a year.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s four remaining SOR debts totaling
$25,547 are not resolved.  Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by insufficient income, a
three-month period of unemployment, caring for his parents, and his divorce.  However, Applicant’s
divorce was final in March 2011, and his financial circumstances have been relatively stable for
more than eight months.  He has not provided sufficient information about efforts to start paying his
four SOR creditors and to fully establish any mitigating conditions.  Applicant did not establish that
he acted responsibly under the circumstances.  Although he maintained contact with his creditors,
and he attempted to negotiate some payment plans, there are no receipts or account statements from
creditors, establishing any payments to the creditors.  There is no track record of payments to
support a conclusion that he will resolve his delinquent debts in the near future, even though
Applicant has been receiving more income since he was hired by his current employer in September
2010. 
Applicant asserts that during his hearing and appeal process he had “notes” and evidence
showing that he was in the process of negotiation with credit card companies, including phone
records and numbers.  He states that he explained to the Judge about these “notes,” but doesn’t know
why the Judge did not accept the notes.  Applicant’s assertion does not establish error on the part
of the Judge.
 
Although Applicant does not precisely define what he means by the term “notes,” the Board
1Tr. at 40-41.
2Tr. at 63-64.
construes his use of the term to mean documentary evidence that he referenced at the hearing.
During the hearing, Applicant produced three documentary exhibits which were admitted into
evidence.  Later in the proceedings, when Applicant was testifying about communications he was
having with creditors, the Judge asked him if he had any documentation concerning those
communications.  Applicant indicated that he thought he had some pertinent documentation, but
indicated he did not have it with him at the hearing.  Department Counsel asked Applicant that if
the Judge left the record open at the conclusion of the hearing, would Applicant be able to submit
certain documents, and Applicant answered in the affirmative.1  There was no further discussion at
the hearing about leaving the record open for receipt of additional evidence from Applicant.
However, after the evidentiary portion of the hearing concluded, the Judge informed Applicant that
he was accepting Applicant’s testimony concerning the receipt of letters from his creditors and the
contents of various settlement offers from the creditors included in the letters.  The Judge then
informed Applicant that he did not need to see the letters, since he was accepting Applicant’s
testimony as fact.2
In his decision, the Judge mentioned that Applicant did not provide written evidence of
negotiations with his creditors, but went on to indicate that he was accepting as credible Applicant’s
statements about the ongoing negotiations.  Inasmuch as Applicant’s arguments on appeal are
limited to evidence of negotiations with his creditors, he has not demonstrated how the Judge’s
actions at the hearing prejudiced his case in any way.  The Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security
clearance decision is not based on Applicant’s failure to negotiate with his creditors.  Rather, it is
principally based on Applicant’s failure to make any payments to his creditors over a considerable
length of time when the evidence indicated he had the means to make at least some payments.
A portion of Applicant’s brief can be construed as an argument that post-hearing
documentary evidence should be considered in evaluating Applicant’s appeal.  The Board cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
Applicant asserts that the evidence of his negotiations with his creditors is an indication of
the fact that he is responsible and willing to pay his debts.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to
weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable
evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  After a review of the record evidence, the Board
concludes that the Judge appropriately weighed the mitigating evidence in the case against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and adequately discussed why the disqualifying conduct
established under Guideline F was not mitigated. 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields     
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
