 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-04778 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq. 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns under Guideline J (criminal 
conduct). Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 12, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline J (criminal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry  (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 27, 2011, and DOHA received his answer 
on July 28, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 15, 2011. 
The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge on October 30, 2011, 
and was reassigned to me on November 29, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
 
        2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
December 2, 2011, scheduling the hearing for December 14, 2011. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer 
any exhibits into evidence. 
 
I held the record open until December 23, 2011, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were received into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 27, 2011. 
   
Findings of Fact1
 
 
Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation with an explanation. His admissions 
and explanation are accepted as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old port engineer employed by a defense contractor since 
March 2004. He is a first-time applicant for a security clearance, and a clearance is 
required for his current position. (Tr. 17-20.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1983. He attended a prestigious 
maritime academy and graduated in June 1987 with a Bachelor of Science degree in 
marine engineering. After graduating from college, Applicant worked in the maritime 
industry primarily on sea-based assignments until he began working for his current 
employer. He completed the requirements for chief engineer officer. (Tr. 20-23.) 
 
 Applicant was married from August 1990 to April 2005. That marriage ended by 
divorce. Two children were born during that marriage – a 21-year-old son and an 18-
year-old daughter. After divorcing his wife, Applicant was awarded custody of his son, 
and his former wife was awarded custody of their daughter. Several years after the 
divorce, Applicant’s daughter chose to live with him. Applicant’s son is independent and 
lives on his own. His daughter is a freshman in college and dependent on him for 
support. (GE, Tr. 23-25.) 
 
Criminal Conduct  
 
On June 17, 2010, Applicant was convicted pursuant to his plea of one count of 
misdemeanor assault. The assault took place on April 2, 2010, in a remote and sparsely 
populated part of the United States. Before this incident, Applicant had no prior criminal 
record. He was sentenced to 180 days in jail with 150 days suspended, fined $1,500 
                                            
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
        3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
with $1,000 suspended, ordered to pay for police training and initial jail surcharges 
totaling $100 which were suspended, ordered to attend an anger management course 
and pay costs, ordered to pay $450 in restitution, and placed on three years probation. 
Applicant was released from jail for good behavior after serving 14 days. He is also free 
to travel and is not required to check in with a probation officer. (Tr. 32-34, 37-39, GE 
5.) 
 
At the time of the assault, Applicant had been dating a woman for approximately 
five years, who he considered to be his girlfriend (GF). GF was employed as a business 
manager by the local school district. They shared a duplex – she owned one-half and 
Applicant owned the other half. At the time of this incident, Applicant’s two children were 
living with him in the duplex. He had been away on business for approximately three 
months and upon his return, he discovered one of his male friends (F) in GF’s duplex in 
a compromising position.  (Tr. 27-31.) 
 
When Applicant arrived at GF’s duplex and discovered F in her duplex, he 
became very angry. Words were exchanged and Applicant punched F in the face 
approximately four or five times and ripped his shirt off. F had abrasions on his forehead 
and on the front and back of his neck, his left ear was red, and he had a scratch on his 
left shoulder. F did not require medical attention. (Tr. 36-37, GE 4.) 
 
Applicant’s employer has full knowledge of this incident. (Tr. 35-36.) Applicant 
expressed sincere remorse for having been involved in an incident of this nature and 
stated that such behavior was not part of his character or an indicator of who he is.  (Tr. 
48.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted four employee performance evaluations covering 2007 to 
2010. It is clear that Applicant’s employer views him as a valued employee with 
significant potential for future service. His employer recently transferred Applicant to a 
new location in a position of increased responsibility. (AE A – D.) 
 
 Applicant’s manager also submitted a reference letter. He has known Applicant 
for nearly ten years. Applicant’s manager described him as “extremely conscientious, 
adaptive, and motivated.” His manager reemphasized everything contained in 
Applicant’s performance evaluations and added his strong personal recommendation 
that Applicant’s security clearance be granted. (AE E.) 
 
Applicant’s former wife is not involved in the lives of their children. His children 
are solely dependent on him for emotional support, and his daughter, who is in college, 
is dependent on him for financial support. (Tr. 48.) Applicant spends a “lot of time” 
tutoring his daughter by telephone in math. (Tr. 44.) 
 
 Lastly, Applicant’s GF submitted a reference letter. She has known Applicant for 
over seven years. She is familiar with his work ethic and dedication as a parent. In both 
 
        4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
areas, she had nothing but glowing praise for him. She stated that Applicant is 
trustworthy, respectful, considerate, and a person of high moral character. (AE F.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
        5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,”  ¶ 31(c), 
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted,” and ¶ 31(d) “individual is currently 
on parole or probation.” 
 
Applicant admitted that he assaulted his male friend by punching him four or five 
times after finding him and his girlfriend in a compromising position. Applicant was 
subsequently convicted of misdemeanor assault pursuant to his guilty plea and is on 
probation. AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c), and 31(d) are established. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) applies. The circumstances under which Applicant assaulted his 
former friend were clearly unique and are not likely to occur again. At the time of this 
incident, Applicant was 44 years old with no criminal history. He was dedicated to his 
profession as well as his children. This incident was a deviation from Applicant’s 
otherwise stellar behavior as a highly regarded professional and devoted father. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(b) and 32(c) do not apply. However, AG ¶ 31(d) fully applies. Applicant 
admitted the assault and accepted responsibility for his actions as evidenced by his 
guilty plea. He has fully complied with all sentencing requirements. He is on non-
supervisory probation and was even allowed to leave the state where the offense 
 
        6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
occurred. His company is aware of this incident and has since transferred him to a new 
location where he has assumed increased responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting denial of Applicant’s clearance. He was a 
mature adult when he committed this assault. This assault shows a lack of judgment 
and a failure to abide by the law and as such, his conduct raises a security concern.     
 
The evidence supporting granting Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  He 
pled guilty to misdemeanor assault. Apart from this isolated incident, Applicant has no 
history of criminal conduct. He has fully complied with all sentencing requirements. 
Applicant is making a significant contribution holding a position of responsibility for his 
company. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate 
national security. His character and good work performance show his responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation. Applicant’s employer clearly supports him or he would not 
have been able to retain his employment after his security clearance was called into 
question. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct.  
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated and overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
        7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
