1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-06744
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:                                      Personal Representative
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant’s delinquent financial accounts were largely caused by the misplaced trust
he placed in his mother to pay expenses he incurred on her behalf and to make payments
toward his personal expenses with funds he provided her. He has acted responsibly and
has now resolved most of his delinquent debt. Clearance is granted.
On November 3, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR, dated November 25, 2011, in which he requested a
hearing. He denied all SOR allegations except subparagraph 1.a.
The case was assigned to me on January 12, 2012. A notice of hearing was issued
on January 31, 2012, scheduling the hearing for February 16, 2012. The hearing was
conducted as scheduled. The Government submitted five documentary exhibits that were
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5 and admitted into the record without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted 3 documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant
Exhibits (AE) 1-3, and admitted into the record without objection. The record was held open
to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documents in support of his case.
Nine documents were timely received, marked as AE 4-12, and admitted into the record
without objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding memorandum indicating she did not
object to the documents submitted by Applicant was marked as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.)
I and is included in the file. The transcript was received on February 23, 2012.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admission to the one SOR allegation is incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 24-year-old man who has been employed as a production technician
by a defense contractor since February 2011. His supervisor submitted a letter of
recommendation for Applicant in which he noted that Applicant has proven himself to be
a reliable, dependable, and trustworthy employee. 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2006. He worked as a cook at two
different restaurants from September 2005 until September 2006, and as a retail store
manager from December 2006 until June 2010. Applicant was unemployed from
September 2006 until December 2006, and again from June 2010 until February 2011.
Applicant was married in August 2009. He and his wife separated in June 2010.
They have a two-year-old child. Applicant currently resides with his father and his two-year-
old child. Applicant’s wife lives and works in another city, and he and she alternate traveling
to the other’s residence to spend time together. They do not share their finances, and
Applicant solely supports his daughter.
Applicant’s parents are divorced and Applicant previously resided with his mother
and sister. The delinquent debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b arose from a cable
television bill for Applicant’s mother’s residence. Applicant was the only person home when
the cable service was installed. He signed for the service, and it was then placed solely in
his name. His mother thereafter failed to make payments for the service. Applicant is now
making payments to satisfy this debt (AE 8).
The debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d is for cellular telephone service that
Applicant acquired for himself, his mother, and his sister, with an understanding that they
would reimburse him for their use of the phones. His mother and sister used the phones
excessively, causing the bill to exceed $1,000, and they then failed to reimburse him for
their charges. Applicant paid that debt, and his mother and sister continued to use their
phones excessively without reimbursing him for their charges which, created the delinquent
account listed in subparagraph 1.d. Applicant has now fully satisfied this debt (AE 9).
The debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a is a delinquent credit card debt. Without
Applicant’s knowledge, his mother used the credit card to make payments on her home
3
mortgage. She only partially repaid him for her charges. Applicant negotiated a reduced
settlement on this debt which is now satisfied (AE 6).
The debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c is the deficiency owed on a repossessed
automobile. Applicant gave his mother the money to make payments on the car loan which
she instead used for other purposes. Applicant testified that he disputes the amount owed
on this debt and he intends to hire an attorney to dispute the debt. The debt remains
unsatisfied, but, based upon Applicant’s responsible resolution of his other debts, will likely
be resolved in the not too distant future.
The debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g is a personal loan Applicant obtained
from his step-brother to pay legal fees when he was contemplating divorcing his wife. The
money was paid to an attorney who refused to refund any portion of it when Applicant
decided not to pursue the divorce. Applicant credibly testified that there was no agreement
between him and his step-brother that the money had to be repaid, and, therefore, the debt
was never delinquent. Applicant has fully repaid this debt (AE 7).
The two debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f, owed in the combined
amount of $90, arose from unidentified medical providers. In response to financial
interrogatories propounded to him by DOHA, Applicant submitted proof that he had
satisfied many other delinquent debts, including many delinquent medical debts, that had
previously been listed as delinquent in his credit reports (GE 5). He credibly testified he has
been unable to satisfy these two minor debts because he has been unable to ascertain to
whom these debts are owed.      
Applicant owes student loans in the amount of $3,669.83 that were in a deferred
payment status until October 2011. The monthly payment due on those loans is $50.
Applicant submitted proof that he has been prepaying the loans by making monthly
payments in amounts ranging from $100 to $110. As a result, he is not required to make
another payment until August 2012. However, he submitted a detailed and realistic monthly
budget that includes $100 monthly payments toward his student loans.
Applicant’s father works for the Government and possesses a top secret security
clearance with sensitive compartmented information (SCI) access. He has earned a
master’s degree. Applicant’s father has worked with Applicant in resolving his debts, and
he has provided Applicant with financial counseling and advice. 
 
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F (financial
considerations) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case.
2 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.
3 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).
6 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.
7 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
8 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
10 Id. at 531.
11 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.
4
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.2 The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.3 The burden of
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.5 “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the
evidence.”6 Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.7 Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance9 and “the clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”10  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.11     
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (Adjudicative
Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant acquired a number of debts that became delinquent, largely due to trust
he misplaced in his mother and her action in misusing his credit card and money he gave
her to make payments on his behalf. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or
5
unwillingness to satisfy debts: and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations
apply.
Applicant has fully satisfied most of his delinquent debts, including those he satisfied
before issuance of the SOR, as verified by the information he provided in response to
financial interrogatories propounded to him by DOHA. He is making payments toward
another delinquent debt, and he credibly testified that he could not locate the unidentified
medical creditors who are owed a combined $90. Applicant has been prepaying his student
loans, and he submitted a detailed and reasonable budget that indicates he will continue
to make greater than required payments on those debts. He has not resolved the large debt
owed as a result of a repossessed automobile, but, based on the manner in which he has
dealt with his other delinquent debt, it is reasonable to conclude that debt will be resolved
in some manner in the foreseeable future. Applicant has obtained counseling and advice
from his father in resolving his delinquent accounts and assuming a financially responsible
lifestyle.
   
The following Mitigating Conditions (MC) apply: MC 20(a): the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control; and MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts.
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the financial
considerations security concern. Applicant has overcome the case against him and
satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-g: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

