KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: There is no record evidence to support Applicant’s contention that Department
Counsel indicated he would not be held responsible for a mortgage debt.  Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence.  The Judge’s findings and
conclusions are supported by the record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 11-03402.a1
DATE: 03/29/2012
DATE: March 29, 2012
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-03402
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 11, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
2
requested a hearing.  On January 4, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Mark Harvey
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Department Counsel advised
Applicant that a mortgage debt would not be held against him and whether the Judge’s decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant was in the Navy from
1985 until his retirement in 2005 as a Chief Petty Officer (E-7).  He married in 1985, separated from
his wife in 2003, and divorced her in 2005.  Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, for such
things as telecommunications services, charged-off accounts owed to banks, and mortgage
payments.  He attributed his financial problems to his marital breakup and consequent loss of
income, his wife having earned more money than he did.  He was ordered by the Court to pay off
some of the credit card expenses, and he was required to pay spousal support.  He also experienced
unemployment following his retirement from the Navy.  Applicant’s debts were current until 2007.
However, the adjustable rate mortgages on his house resulted in an increase in his monthly
payments, and the payments became delinquent in 2008.  The house eventually went into
foreclosure.  He used credit cards to pay day-to-day living expenses.
Applicant consulted an attorney, but stopped working with him when the attorney
recommended bankruptcy protection.  He has provided care to his elderly mother and has supported
other family members as well.  He is current on his expenses.  However, he did not provide
documentary evidence of negotiations with creditors.  Applicant received numerous decorations
while in the Navy, and he enjoys as excellent reputation for the quality of his job performance,
trustworthiness, and integrity.  
In the Analysis, the Judge noted circumstances beyond Applicant’s control that affected his
financial problem, such as his divorce and unemployment.  He also cited to evidence of Applicant’s
good military record and to his character references.  However, the Judge concluded that Applicant
had not demonstrated responsible action regarding his debts, citing a paucity of evidence showing
payments, negotiations, etc.  Neither had Applicant shown a track record of debt resolution.  The
Judge stated that Applicant’s financial circumstances have been stable since 2005, yet he has not
made significant efforts at debt repayment.  The Judge opined that Applicant could free up money
for debt repayment by reducing his living expenses.  As it is, the Judge stated that Applicant had
submitted no evidence that any of the SOR creditors had received payment.
Applicant asserts in his appeal brief, “All of the legal advice I have received and research
I have done, including a casual conversation after my . . . hearing with [Department Counsel],
indicate that I won’t be held responsible for the debt.”  There is no record of such a conversation
after the hearing.  While it is true that, during the hearing, Department Counsel, in a colloquy with
the Judge, did discuss at considerable length the fine points of state law as it pertains to the debt,
Department Counsel was not in a position to provide legal advice to an opposing party Applicant.
Furthermore, given Appeal Board precedent that “reliance on the uncollectability of a debt does not
3
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve that debt within the meaning of the Directive”(See ISCR
Case No. 07-16841 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2008)), the Judge did not err by finding against
Applicant with regard to the debt.  Applicant has not demonstrated that he was denied due process
or that the Judge erred. 
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider favorable evidence, such as his good
credit rating until the foreclosure, the effect of the housing crisis and of his marital problems on his
finances, and poor advice he received from an attorney.  A Judge is presumed to have considered
all of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-10068 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2011).  The
Judge discussed Applicant’s marital separation in some detail.  He also made appropriate findings
concerning Applicant’s foreclosure and his attorney’s advice.  Applicant has not demonstrated that,
if the Judge had discussed these things in more detail, that he would have produced a different
decision.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.
Applicant takes issue with some of the Judge’s statements in the whole-person analysis, for
example, that it is not clear why Applicant has not addressed his smaller debts, that Applicant should
reduce his living expenses, that his financial situation has been stable since 2005, etc.  We have
considered Applicant’s argument in light of the record as a whole.  The statements cited in
Applicant’s brief are reasonable conclusions drawn from the evidence that was before the Judge.
We find no reason to conclude that they were erroneous or that, had the Judge not made these
statements, he would have produced a different decision.     
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
4
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
