 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03813 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 6, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of failing to file annual Federal and state income tax 
returns as required. He is indebted to both the Federal and state governments for 
unpaid taxes. He presented little evidence that he is acting responsibly with respect to 
these tax debts. He has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons (SOR) in writing on October 6, 
2011, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 22, 2011. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on 
December 2, 2011. He was afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. As of January 12, 2012, 
he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on January 24, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer from September 1999 to present. He has successfully held a 
security clearance for 35 years. He is divorced and has two children. (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant was sick with emphysema. He was unable to work very many 
hours due to his illness. He was an hourly employee and was not paid when he was 
unable to work. He failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns that year 
because he was ill and forgot to file. His illness continued, and it was a number of years 
before he filed income taxes with either the Federal government or state government. 
(Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant admits that he did not file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 
2003-2006 (SOR allegations 1.a and 1. c). He disclosed that he owes the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) $12,750 for 2003-2005 (SOR allegation 1.b), and an additional 
$8,871 for 2006 (SOR allegation 1.d). Applicant provided a copy of his 2007-2009 
Federal income tax filings. He prepared the 2007-2009 Federal income tax returns 
sometime after May 2011 (SOR allegation 1.e). He indicated he owed the IRS $2,081 
for 2007; $5,847 for 2008; and $4,301 for 2009. He submitted copies of checks to the 
IRS to demonstrate payment, but he failed to submit any documentation from the IRS 
that the payments had been received or that the checks had been cashed. Further, one 
of the checks was incorrectly dated June 2001. (Item 5.) 
 
 In addition, Applicant admitted that he failed to file state income taxes for 2003-
2009, as required by law (SOR allegation 1.e). He owes his state at least $4,000 for tax 
liens (SOR allegation 1.f). He indicated his wages were garnished by the state to repay 
his tax debt beginning in 2010. He provided no proof of payment. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates he has a net remainder of 
$285.80 after his monthly expenses are met. His financial statement did not include any 
payment to the IRS. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant presented no other evidence to establish his character. He did not 
provide any character references, work performance evaluation, or copies of awards 
and certificates. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts owed to both the Federal 
and state governments, and is unable or unwilling to pay his obligations. Further, his 
financial problems have been ongoing since 2003, without resolution. He failed to file 
his Federal income tax returns from 2003-2006 and failed to file his state income tax 
returns from 2003-2009. His Federal returns for 2007 through 2009 were filed several 
years late. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence does not show that Applicant has resolved any of his tax debts 
alleged in the SOR. He presented no evidence that he has filed his Federal income tax 
returns from 2003-2006 and failed to file his state income tax returns from 2003-2009. 
The copies of checks he presented as evidence of paying his 2007-2009 Federal tax 
debts were not sufficient to show that payment was actually made. His financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant failed to present any documentation in 
support of this claim. While he may have been ill in 2003, he presented no 
documentation showing his illness is prohibiting him from filing his state and Federal 
income tax returns or making payments on his delinquent taxes. To be fully applicable, 
AG ¶ 20(b) requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant did not submit concrete evidence of payments on his tax debts. He did not 
present a plan on how he will address his delinquent debts. I am unable to make a 
determination that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant did not produce any evidence to suggest he attended any financial 
counseling. Further, there is little indication that Applicant’s delinquent tax debts are 
being resolved or are under control. He did not produce evidence that he filed his 
Federal income tax returns from 2003-2006 or his state income tax returns from 2003-
2009. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay, file, or resolve his delinquent 
tax debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant did not dispute any of the allegations in his Answer. Further, he 
presented no evidence to show that he was in the process of disputing these allegations 
and debts or that he had successfully disputed this debt in the past. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 54 
years old. He is clearly aware of the need to be financially responsible and file his state 
and Federal income taxes. He has had ample opportunity to address his taxes, but has 
failed present evidence that he is taking responsible actions to file and pay his Federal 
and state taxes. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
