 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01774  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant rebutted personal conduct security concerns, but he has not mitigated 
alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
G (alcohol consumption) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 2, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on January 3, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 12, 
 
2 
 
2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any 
documentary evidence. The record was held open until February 27, 2012, for Applicant 
to submit additional information. No additional information was submitted. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 22, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2000. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He served in the military from 1977 until he was discharged with a general 
discharge in 1981. He attended college for a period, but he has not earned a degree. 
He is married for the fourth time. He has an adult child and two minor stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI) in 
1981, 1991, and 1998. He pleaded no contest to the 1991 and 1998 charges and 
received deferred adjudications. After the 1998 charge, he was required to attend 
alcohol counseling. As part of the counseling, Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent. The details of the diagnosis are unclear, as the information that he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent came from Applicant’s memory.2 
 
 In December 2008, Applicant was charged with appearing in an intoxicated 
condition. Applicant stated that he was drinking in a bar and took a taxi to another bar. 
When he arrived at the second bar, he realized that he left his wallet in the first bar, and 
he did not have money to pay the taxi fare. The taxi driver was upset and called the 
police. Applicant was living in another state at the time of the arrest, but he moved 
before the court date. He did not receive the court summons notifying him of the court 
date. In April 2010, Applicant was drinking in a bar with some friends. One of his friends 
was involved in a ruckus, causing the police to arrive. The police checked the 
identifications of people in the area of the disturbance, including Applicant. The police 
discovered a bench warrant for Applicant’s failure to appear on the intoxicated condition 
charge and arrested him for that charge. The charge was eventually dismissed.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
August 2010. Under Section 22: Police Record, the instructions stated: “For questions a 
and b, respond for the timeframe of the last 7 years (if an SSBI go back 10 years).” 
Section 22e asked “Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) related to 
alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered “Yes” and listed his December 2008 arrest, 
which he classified as “drunk in public.” He did not list his April 2010 arrest, because 
that was not a separate charge. He did not list the three DUIs because he misread the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18, 19, 23-24, 36, 41; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 32, 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
question to limiting the scope of the question to seven years.4 After considering all the 
evidence, I find that Applicant did not intentionally falsify his SF 86. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has had some alcohol-related work problems, 
including arriving late and feeling hung-over. He stated that he has not driven after 
drinking since his 1998 arrest. He does not believe that he is an alcoholic. He does not 
drink during the week, but he would have a few drinks over the weekend. When he does 
drink, it is responsibly and in moderation. Over the course of an evening, he would have 
three to six drinks. He rarely goes to bars anymore. His New Year’s resolution was to 
stop drinking completely. He stated that he had not had a drink since New Year’s Eve 
2011.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 19, 34-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. at 20, 24-31, 34, 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 22. 
The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
 Applicant has multiple alcohol-related arrests. He admitted that he has had some 
alcohol-related work problems, including arriving late and feeling hung-over. AG ¶¶ 
22(a), 22(b), and 22(c) are applicable. 
 
5 
 
 After the 1998 DUI charge, Applicant was required to attend alcohol counseling. 
As part of the counseling, Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. The details of 
who made the diagnosis are unavailable. Applicant was given the opportunity after the 
hearing to seek another diagnosis. Nothing was submitted. Applicant’s diagnosis of 
alcohol dependence does not fit the exact definition of AG ¶ 22(d). However, the Appeal 
Board has stated that an administrative judge should take an expansive view of what 
constitutes a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug 
treatment program, and that “¶ 22 is not an exhaustive and exclusive list of disqualifying 
conditions; rather the word ‘include’ in the preamble signals that the matters listed are 
illustrative in nature and do not provide a Judge with a basis to conclude that factors or 
categories not explicitly described do not raise security concerns.” ISCR Case No. 07-
00558 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008). I find that Applicant’s unrebutted diagnosis of 
alcohol dependence raises a security concern, even without the exact qualifications of 
the person making the diagnosis.  
 
 Applicant’s April 2010 arrest was because of a bench warrant for his December 
2008 charge. SOR ¶ 1.f, which alleges the April 2010 arrest, is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence to dispute his diagnosis as alcohol 
dependent. It has been more than 13 years since his last DUI, and more than 3 years 
since his actions that led to the appearing in an intoxicated condition charge. Applicant 
testified that in the last several years, when he did drink, it was responsibly and in 
moderation. He also stated that his New Year’s resolution was to stop drinking 
completely, and that he had not had a drink since New Year’s Eve 2011. The hearing 
was held on January 12, 2012. At that time, he had been abstinent for about 12 days. 
The record was held open until February 27, 2012. Applicant did not provide any 
additional information, so I do not know if he has maintained his abstinence. Without 
additional information, I am unable to find a sufficient period of abstinence for AG ¶ 
23(b) to be applicable. I find that Applicant’s alcohol issues are recent, did not happen 
under unusual circumstances, and I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to 
recur. Applicant’s alcohol consumption continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) is not applicable. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant provided inaccurate information on his SF 86, but it was not intentional. 
AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
7 
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and his stable work history. However, 
Applicant has not submitted sufficient information to mitigate the concerns raised by his 
history of alcohol abuse and alcohol-related incidents.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
rebutted personal conduct security concerns, but he has not mitigated alcohol 
consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
