                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 11-03026 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James Hanson, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on July 
9, 2010. On July 29, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) for Applicant. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 4, 2011.  She answered 
the SOR in writing on August 22, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 3, 
2011, and I received the case assignment on October 6, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on October 24, 2011, for a hearing date of November 10, 2011. That hearing 
was cancelled and another Notice of Hearing was issued on November 21, 2011, for a 
hearing on December 8, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 8, 
2011. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were received without 
objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through F, 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 19, 
2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 
and 1.d to 1.x of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.c of the SOR. She also provided additional information to support her request 
for eligibility for a public trust position Applicant denied Paragraph 2 of the SOR.  
 
Applicant is 52 years old, married, and has three children. Two children are 
adults and the third child is 15 years old living with her. Applicant works for a defense 
contractor in the health insurance business as a clerk. She started her employment in 
2010. (Tr. 32, 33) 
 
The SOR lists 24 delinquent debts totaling $96,904. There are actually 22 
delinquent debts because the debts in Subparagraphs 1.h ($697) and 1.t ($770, being 
the correct amount) are duplicates. Also, the debts in Subparagraphs 1.i ($1,045) and 
1.j ($1,269, the correct amount) are duplicates. Applicant paid two of the remaining 
SOR-listed debts. She paid the debt in Subparagraph 1.a owed to a department store 
for $1,352 through a garnishment. Applicant also brought her mortgage current 
(Subparagraph 1.c) ($12,204 in missed payments). The remaining 20 delinquent debts 
remain unpaid, totaling $81,606. Applicant disputed the amount of the debts in 
Subparagraphs 1.c ($41,606) and 1.e ($20,891, the deficiency amount on a 
repossessed automobile). Applicant does not deny she owes these two debts. Applicant 
does not deny owing any of the other debts. Applicant admitted she has no plans on 
how she is going to repay them. (Tr. 35, 36-46, 79, 111; Exhibits 2-6, A, B) 
 
The 20 delinquent debts still unpaid include 15 debts with balances under 
$1,000. Of those 15 debts, 11 debts are under $500. The small debts range from $3.00 
(Subparagraph 1.v) to $464 (Subparagraph 1.n) and total $2,220. While these debts 
remain unpaid, Applicant and her husband spent money in the past year replacing their 
refrigerator in their community home (Home 1), which is also their primary residence, 
replaced the back porch that was in deteriorating condition, refurbished the bathroom to 
better accommodate their clients, and installing a new furnace. (Tr. 74, 78-80; SOR) 
Applicant’s financial problems started when she and her husband opened in 2000 a 
community-based residential facility corporate business to care for senior citizens 
usually in their 70s or 80s. She hired a director who was succeeded later by that 
person’s son. The son managed Home 1.  
 
Applicant and her husband leased an apartment house a short distance from this 
residential facility. (Home 2.) That apartment house had residents in their 50s and 60s. 
Their on-site director embezzled funds from the corporate checking account for Homes 
1 and2. This person was prosecuted criminally and Applicant received about $20,000 in 
restitution. The amount embezzled was about $40,000. Applicant did not sue the 
perpetrator in civil court because he had no assets to attach. They shut their corporate 
business operating Homes 1 and 2 in May 2007. This criminal action deprived Applicant 
of her monthly income. (Tr. 47-55; Exhibits 2-6, C)  
 
Applicant’s husband borrowed money from his father to pay the employees as 
the business wound down. He repaid that money. Applicant’s husband took a salary 
from the corporate business only one year out of the seven they operated the corporate 
business. They used their personal funds to pay the debts of the business as the 
residential business bank account was drained by the embezzler and the business 
failed. The residential facility also had a gas leak one day that adversely affected its 
profitability. Applicant did not own the buildings they used, but rented them from a 
landlord. The residential business cost $10,000 monthly to operate, according to the 
Applicant. One third of that amount was for rent, one third for employee salaries, and 
the last third for gas and electricity. Applicant’s profit from the business was $10,000 
monthly. When that income vanished, Applicant was not able to pay the debts resulting 
from that business. (Tr. 54-60, 90, 92; Exhibits D and E) 
 
Applicant and her husband also operated a small group home in their hometown, 
50 miles to the east. (Home 3.) After Homes 1 and 2 closed in 2007 Applicant continued 
to operate Home 3 with three adults living there. This business is in their personal 
residence, in which they take care of adults who cannot live on their own. They are paid 
by the state for providing this service. Applicant also got a job to earn income. She 
worked at a retail store from September 2007 into 2008. Then she worked for a local 
hospital for a short time. She was then unemployed for nine months until obtaining a job 
with her current employer in 2010. Applicant earns $1,600 monthly net income. Her 
husband’s net income monthly is $8,600 if the three slots in their home are filled. Their 
net remainder monthly income currently is $2,800. As stated, from that amount 
Applicant paid for a new porch, a new refrigerator, painted the house, purchased a new 
furnace, and a new bathroom. Applicant projected she would need a new water heater 
installed soon in her personal residence-community house. (Tr. 60-64, 69, 70, 74, 78, 
79) 
 
Meanwhile, her home state was late in making payments for the services she 
and her husband rendered to the persons in her home. There was a payment delay of 
eight and a half months. The payments delayed amounted to about $8,000. (Tr. 64-66; 
Attachments to Applicant’s Answer) 
 
The delay in state payments did not affect Applicant’s ability to repay her older 
personal debts because they already existed before the payment problems with the 
state arose. Applicant admitted she did not have money with which to pay them from 
her current assets during the last five years. She devoted any income to providing for 
her family and operating her sole remaining home, which was also her personal 
residence. Those debts continued to be unpaid. (Tr. 66-67; Exhibit 3)  
 
Applicant disclosed only two delinquent debts over 180 days delinquent on her 
July 2010 e-QIP. She did not answer Section 22b with a complete list of her delinquent 
debts. Applicant listed only the debts in Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. She did not list any 
other delinquent debts, thinking the government would check her credit record and find 
the other debts or already knew what her debts were. Applicant also claims she did not 
know the specifics of her other delinquent debts when she completed the e-QIP. 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on January 7, 2011. At that 
interview Applicant did not correct the omissions of her delinquent debts before being 
confronted by the investigator with her 20 delinquent debts. (Tr. 83-85; Exhibit 3)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, ADP II, and ADP III are classified as “sensitive 
positions.”  (See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must 
be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, 
the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the 
person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”  
(See Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense 
(Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates 
trustworthiness adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG 
(AG ¶ 2 (a)). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG ¶18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Two conditions may apply in this case. 
 
Under AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” 
may raise concerns. Applicant accumulated $96,904 in delinquent debt as alleged in the 
SOR and has been unable to pay these obligations since 2007. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes six examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. One mitigating condition may 
be considered. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted above, all of 
the financial problems arose from Applicant’s business failure in 2007, which was 
caused by her employee’s embezzlement of the money received by the adult care 
community home operated by Applicant and her husband. She did not sue the 
perpetrator to obtain restitution. Applicant received some money from the criminal court 
action brought against the embezzler, estimated at $20,000 by Applicant. When Homes 
1and 2 closed, she lost that income.  
 
Applicant also claims she was not reimbursed by the government for expenses 
according to her state’s policy regarding community homes. This delay or failure to pay 
adversely affected Applicant’s ability to pay her business debts.  
 
Yet, in the same time period Applicant made improvements to her home related 
community care business, which is also her primary residence. Applicant also took no 
action to resolve any of her remaining 20 delinquent debts. The majority (11) of those 
debts is under $500 and could have been paid as part of a regular installment payment 
plan. Applicant paid one other debt when the creditor garnished her wages. She brought 
her mortgage current, which was the only voluntary action she took to resolve her 
delinquent debts. Consequently, Applicant did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances since her business closed five years ago. I find this potentially mitigating 
condition is not a factor for consideration in this case.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition may apply in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant listed only two debts on her e-QIP that were more than 180 days 
delinquent. She did not list the other 20 debts that were presented in the SOR as 
seriously delinquent. Applicant claims the embezzlement by a former employee and the 
slow payment by the state for services in their community homes caused her inability to 
pay her delinquent debts. The magnitude and recurring nature of these debts and 
unique reason for her financial problems were significant, such that is it not likely she 
forgot about them when completing her e-QIP. Applicant deliberately concealed relevant 
facts from her e-QIP. AG ¶ 16 (a) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 Applicant did not correct her omissions before being interviewed by the 
government investigator in January 2011. AG ¶ 17 (a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was not advised improperly or inadequately by a lawyer or authorized 
person to omit her delinquent debts beyond the two she did disclose. AG ¶ 17 (b) does 
not apply.  
 
 The omission of $81,606 in delinquent debt from her SF 85P is not a minor 
offense, nor did it happen under such unique circumstances that the situation is unlikely 
to recur. The failure to disclose does cast doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 17 (c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has not sought counseling or acknowledged the behavior that causes 
the untrustworthiness. She has not taken any positive steps to alleviate the conditions 
that caused her to omit her 20 delinquent debts or to reduce vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17 (d) and (e) do not apply. 
 
 The financial information is accurate and printed in credit reports kept in the 
normal course of business. AG ¶ 17 (f) does not apply. 
 
 Association by Applicant with persons involved in criminal activity is not relevant 
nor an issue in this hearing. Therefore, AG ¶ 17 (g) does not apply. 
     
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has accumulated a serious 
amount of debt resulting from a business failure in 2007. She admitted she and her 
husband have done nothing to resolve these debts in the past five years. There has 
been no change in her conduct regarding the debts since then. She took her current job, 
the third of three since 2007, to help support her family and continue to operate her 
home-based business. Other than this action, nothing has been done by Applicant to 
resolve her delinquent debts. Applicant continues in the same community home 
business with her husband, showing no behavioral changes. The magnitude of debt 
gives Applicant the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. The current 
status of her debts and the family business shows that there is likelihood for 
continuation and recurrence of the financial problems.  She has not undertaken credit 
counseling. She did not show a budget. Nor did Applicant show a plan for resolving 
unpaid debt. Her actions during the past five years continued to demonstrate poor 
financial judgment. 
 
Her personal conduct trustworthiness concern is serious because she omitted a 
substantial amount of delinquent debt from her e-QIP. She was intimately involved in 
the business that failed and knew she had delinquent debts. Disclosure of only two 
debts is insufficient to meet the requirements of Section 22b on the e-QIP. Applicant 
voluntarily limited her debt disclosure. That action creates a potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position alleged. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her 
financial considerations. Applicant did not mitigate the same concern with regards to her 
personal conduct failure to disclose her debts to the government. I conclude the “whole-
person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.x:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
