 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04756 
  ) 
  )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on November 14, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 
2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 8, 2012, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on March 6, 2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted into the record without objection. Department Counsel’s 
exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified at the hearing, but 
did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 15, 
2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations under both 
guidelines. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor for over five 
years. He is single and has no children. He graduated from high school and earned 
some college credits. He has no military experience and currently holds a security 
clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) being arrested and 
charged with felony counts of resisting arrest and aggravated assault in October 2010 
(subsequently, all charges were dismissed without prejudice because law enforcement 
failed to produce required evidence for the defense); (2) consuming alcohol to the point 
of intoxication which led to the criminal charges in October 2010.  
 
 On October 21, 2010, Applicant and two friends went to a local bar for some 
drinks after work. Applicant proceeded to drink approximately 10 mixed drinks over the 
course of six hours that evening and became intoxicated. Because of his state of 
intoxication, he does not remember much about what transpired the rest of the evening. 
He remembered being outside the bar with his friends waiting for a taxi to take them 
home. The next thing he remembered was waking up in the local hospital after being 
Tasered by Sheriff’s deputies. He was told (not clear from the record who told him) that 
he struck at one of the deputies with his fist and was Tasered in an effort to control 
him.2  
 
 The Sheriff’s report, prepared by one of the deputies involved in the incident that 
night, described Applicant as “very intoxicated” and stumbling toward one of the 
deputies. This stumble was not viewed by either deputy as an act of aggression, but 
rather just a person who was very intoxicated. Then the report stated Applicant began to 
walk away from one deputy and that deputy grabbed his arm. At that point, the report 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4-5, 53-54; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 22, 26-27; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
states that Applicant “turned around and struck Deputy H in the face with a closed fist.” 
It also states that Applicant continued to hit the deputy. The deputy pushed him to the 
ground and he was Tasered by the other deputy. He was Tasered a second time 
because the report stated he continued to resist. He was then handcuffed. Applicant 
scraped his face on the pavement when he was on the ground and requested medical 
attention. The Sheriff’s report concluded by stating that neither deputy was injured and 
that both a digital recording and digital pictures were taken and would be used to 
supplement the report at a later date. Neither deputy testified during this hearing.3  
 
 The two friends who were with Applicant the evening in question told him a 
different version of what happened concerning his interaction with the deputies. They 
said while all three were outside the bar waiting for a taxi, Applicant stumbled into the 
direction of the approaching deputies. They believe the deputies interpreted this as a 
hostile act. The deputies then Tasered Applicant and hit him with unknown objects 
causing multiple injuries.4  
 
 In December 2010, the county attorney requested that the Sheriff’s office supply 
the supplemental evidence to its office (the digital recording and photos taken the 
evening of the arrest); however, the Sheriff’s office refused to honor the request. In 
January 2011, a second request was made and it was also ignored. Consequently, the 
county attorney’s office moved to dismiss the charges because the Sheriff’s office 
refused to supply evidence that was required to be disclosed to the defense. On 
January 26, 2011, the judge granted the motion and the charges were dismissed 
without prejudice. No subsequent charges were ever brought against Applicant. 
Applicant was never involved with law enforcement before this incident and has not 
been involved with them since this incident.5  
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was about 17 years old. His drinking 
frequency at that time was about once a month. He drank at local parties, but does not 
recall the amount of consumption. He stopped drinking completely when he was 18 
years old and remained abstinent until he was about 23 years old. He would drink about 
once every week or two. He drank socially at bars and would consume about six or 
seven mixed drinks. This amount of alcohol would typically lead to intoxication. His 
drinking pattern was to meet friends at local bars and drink with them. He did not drive 
after nights of drinking. He believes he drank more during the night of his arrest than he 
normally drinks.6  
 
 
 
                                                          
3 GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 27; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 25, 28; GE 3. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-39; GE 2.  
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant has never been through any alcohol treatment or counseling program. 
He has not been diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or as alcohol dependent. He has not 
participated in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). After the arrest in October 2010, Applicant 
began a self-evaluation of his drinking habits. He read a book titled Under the Influence 
and concluded that he was an alcoholic. He made the decision to limit the amount of 
alcohol he consumed to one or two drinks when he went out about once every two 
weeks. This reduction took place in December 2010. In October 2011, he stopped 
drinking any amount of alcohol. He testified that he has remained abstinent since then. 
He claims he made the decision to stop drinking entirely before he received the SOR in 
his case. Although he does not participate in AA or any other alcohol support group, he 
feels he has the support of certain friends and family. This support helps him with his 
sobriety. He has not ruled out the possibility that he might participate in AA or undergo 
alcohol treatment in the future, if he feels the need to do so. He does not intend to drink 
in the future. He still occasionally goes out to bars with friends who drink alcohol.7    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 29-33, 35, 47-48; GE 2. 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was charged with resisting arrest and aggravated assault upon a law 
enforcement officer. The charges were dismissed because law enforcement failed to 
supply necessary evidence. I find that the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense. 
 Although Applicant admits that he was so intoxicated he does not recall what 
happened, it is apparent that the alleged assault and resisting arrest allegations are not 
supported by the evidence. The police report is contradicted by witness testimony and is 
 
6 
 
 
of questionable reliability because the Sheriff’s office failed to produce evidence referred 
to in the report that could totally corroborate the narrative write up. Even when the 
prosecuting attorney specifically requested this evidence on two different occasions, the 
Sheriff’s office refused to produce it, resulting in the prosecution’s motion for dismissal. 
Because the Sheriff’s report is uncorroborated and in variance with other evidence, 
there is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant committed the crimes. AG ¶ 32(c) 
applies.   
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents 
of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
 Applicant’s admitted intoxicated state on the night of October 21, 2010, put him in 
a position that led to the encounter with law enforcement. Even though he did not 
commit a crime, he exercised poor judgment in drinking to excess. The evidence 
supports the application of both disqualifying conditions. 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and considered the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has been involved in only one alcohol-related incident. He 
acknowledged his culpability for that incident when he drank to excess. He has modified 
his actions in light of his recognition that he believes he is an alcoholic. First, he 
reduced his alcohol consumption, and then he stopped completely. I found his 
testimony credible concerning his desire to stop drinking and his willingness to follow 
through with actions to carry out his intent. He has evaluated himself and chosen a path 
of abstinence even though he has not been classified as either an alcohol abuser or as 
alcohol dependent. A recurrence of similar behavior is unlikely and there is no other 
evidence to question his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Both AG ¶¶ 23 
(a) and (b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s 
current position, and the circumstances that caused his arrest by law enforcement. I 
also considered that Applicant made a conscience decision to alter his lifestyle and 
remain abstinent so that no future alcohol-related incidents might occur. He has made 
positive strides to change his behavior and, although his abstinence is less than one 
year, his sincerity of effort is reflected in his actions. Applicant provided sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
