KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant has not shown that he was denied any procedural due process rights afforded
him under the Directive. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-04112.a1
DATE: 05/28/2019
DATE: May 28, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
--------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 16-04112
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 4, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
At the hearing, the Judge amended the SOR by adding another Guideline F allegation.  Tr. at 90-91.
On February 26, 2019, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
The SOR, as amended, alleged that Applicant had eight delinquent debts totaling over
$99,000.  It also alleged that he had three Chapter 13 bankruptcies dismissed between 1999 and
2013, that he was granted a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2014, and that he filed Chapter 13
bankruptcy in March 2018, which was pending approval of a plan.  The pending bankruptcy lists
debts – over $93,000 in an educational loan and nearly $9,000 in Federal and state taxes – that are
likely not dischargeable.  He paid three of the alleged debts after the SOR was issued.  He and his
wife have been plagued with a series of automobile accidents, injuries, and illnesses.  They have
incurred significant out-of-pocket expenses for medical treatments.  Applicant documented that he
received financial counseling and provided character references attesting to his honesty and
trustworthiness.
  
The Judge found in favor of Applicant on four bankruptcy allegations in the SOR and against
him on the remaining allegations, including the one involving the 2018 bankruptcy proceeding. 
Applicant did not address $4,000 in delinquent debts until after he received the SOR.  He began a
rehabilitation plan for his $95,000 educational loan before issuance of the SOR but failed to submit
information about the status of the loan after March 2017.  He encountered circumstances beyond
his control, and his filing of the latest bankruptcy petition can be considered reasonable under the
circumstances.  However, he falls short of showing progress on the pending bankruptcy.  His one
payment on the still unapproved plan is insufficient to establish a favorable track record of payments. 
It is too soon to conclude that his financial problems have been resolved or are under control. He has
not shown a good-faith effort to address his debts.      
    
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s analysis of the evidence.  For example, he argues that his
financial problems were due to conditions beyond his control and that he has acted responsibly under
the circumstances in his attempts to resolve those problems.  His arguments, however, are neither
enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence nor sufficient
to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02488 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 30, 2018).  
Applicant contends that the Judge applied guidelines to him that pertain to military personnel. 
It appears that Applicant is making this contention based on the Judge’s citation to Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988) in the decision.1  This contention does not raise any error. 
1 Egan is a U.S. Supreme Court decision that does not specifically address the granting or denial of security
clearances to military personnel; however, it does generally address the Executive Branch’s authority to grant or deny
security clearances.  
2
The Adjudicative Guidelines used in this case apply to practically all individuals who require access
to classified information, including DoD contractors.  See Directive, Encl. 2 ¶¶ B, C, D.4, D.5, and
D.8 that address the applicability of the Adjudicative Guidelines. 
Applicant argues that the Judge asked him more questions than Department Counsel.  To the
extent that Applicant is claiming the Judge was not impartial, we did not find that argument
persuasive.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased, and a party
seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-03108 at 3 (App. Bd. May 20, 2015).  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge
was unbiased.2 
Applicant asserts that he received a security clearance in 2002 that was renewed in 2013 and
that he should not have to renew it again until 2023.  He also notes that the Judge indicated the
reason for the current background investigation is unclear.   To the extent that Applicant is arguing
that the Government was precluded from reevaluating his security clearance eligibility, we do not
find that argument persuasive.  A favorable security decision does not give an applicant the right to
retain a security clearance regardless of subsequent events or changed circumstances.  The
Government is not barred from issuing an adverse security clearance decision once it becomes aware
of information that calls into question an applicant’s suitability to hold a security clearance.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-08806 at 4 (App. Bd. May 8, 2007). 
Applicant further argues that he should have a right to know any and all accusations against
him and the decision should be based on what actually happened as opposed to what could happen. 
In making these arguments, he highlights that there is no proof that he engaged in any wrongdoing.
The SOR provided Applicant adequate notice of the Government’s security concerns.3  Applicant
has not shown that he was denied any procedural due process rights afforded him under the
Directive.  As the Appeal Board has previously stated, security clearance decisions are not an exact
science, but rather involve predictive judgments about an applicant’s security eligibility in light of
the applicant’s past conduct and present circumstances.  The Federal Government need not wait until
an applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before it can deny or revoke
2 We note the things that our colleague has addressed in his separate opinion and agree that the Judge could have
spoken more temperately at times.  We do not believe that the matters raised in the separate opinion are sufficient to rebut
the presumption that the Judge was impartial.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02391 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2018). 
Moreover, the Judge provided Applicant with an opportunity to present additional evidence, including an affidavit from
his wife, which significantly diminishes any harm that might otherwise have come about due to the ruling addressed in
the separate opinion. 
3 After the Judge indicated on the record the SOR amendment, Applicant’s Counsel stated, “I have no heartburn
with that amendment, but I do think that I should have the -- if Your Honor is going to give weight to various debts listed
in that bankruptcy, that we were not put on notice of, then I should have an opportunity to address those specific
allegations in a proper response to the SOR.”   Tr. at 91.  In this regard, we note that it was Applicant who introduced
into evidence that he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2018.  Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) I and Tr. at 54-56. We also
note that, as mentioned in the previous footnote, Applicant was also provided an opportunity to submit post-hearing
matters, including matters about the debts in the bankruptcy and an affidavit from his wife.  AE M (1-15).    
3
access to classified information based on an applicant’s conduct or circumstances that raise security
concerns even in the absence of security violations.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-09966 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jun. 25, 2008).  A history of financial difficulties raises security concerns.  Directive, Encl. 2,
App. A ¶¶ 18 and 19.  Guideline F security concerns are broader than the possibility that an applicant
might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money to satisfy his or her
debts.  Those concerns also encompass the risk that applicants who are financially irresponsible
might also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified
information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  In this case,
Applicant has failed to show that the Judge erred in his analysis of the record evidence under
Guideline F.  
Applicant has not established that the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Egan at 528.  See also
Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
See Dissenting Opinion              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member Appeal Board
4
DISSENTING OPINION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE MICHAEL Y. RA’ANAN
Applicant’s brief raises the issue of bias: “...it also seems that the decision had already been
made.”  Applicant’s brief at page 3.  In reviewing the transcript of the hearing for evidence of bias
(or absence thereof), I noted several instances of seemingly hostile demeanor or  arbitrary rulings by
the Judge against either Applicant, Applicant’s wife, or Applicant’s attorney, a former DOHA
official.  The attorney is not representing Applicant on appeal.  Cumulatively, these episodes support
a concern as to whether the Judge was biased or could reasonably be perceived as such.
Applicant’s wife has been in multiple accidents and had multiple surgeries and
hospitalizations over several decades.  Furthermore, she is a cancer survivor.  She attended the
Hearing in a wheelchair.  Her testimony regarding her medical history and the attendant billing was
integral to Applicant’s case.  On pages 9-10 of the transcript, Applicant’s attorney moved to have
the wife testify first and not sequester her. The Judge responded to the motion as follows “Well,
because, [Applicant’s attorney] we get to go through whether or not there are any procedural issues
in the case in which case there will be issues discussed on the record that the witness doesn’t need
to hear, so it is appropriate.  So we’re off the record.  Please make whatever arrangements you need
to do to have [Applicant’s wife] rest comfortably while we finish the rest of the preliminary stuff and
we begin the hearing, at which point you may then call her first, at which point after she has testified,
because this hearing is open, she may remain in the hearing room.  We’re off the record.  Thank
you.”  At that point they went off the record for one hour and one minute.  When the proceedings
resumed neither party had any procedural issues to address.
After Applicant wife testified, the Judge said to her “Thank you for giving us your time here
this morning.  You are free to wheel yourself to the back of the hearing room and remain, as long
as it takes.”  Transcript pp. 47-48.  Note that the attorney had made no motion to have her stay in the
room, indeed, he never spoke at all, at that juncture.  On page 82, while Applicant is testifying, the
Judge says “Yes $683 to [a bank] $312 to [another bank] $1,489 to [a third bank].  So with the
alleged [cable tv company]–I’m sorry [Applicant’s wife], you’ve testified, and you’re done.  I’m
sorry.  That’s how it works.”. . . .  On page 86, Applicant’s attorney asked “Your Honor, may I
consult for a moment in the hall with [Applicant’s wife] to find out what’s on her mind, and
determine whether to ask you to allow--” The Judge said “No, you may not.  It’s the risk you run. 
She stayed in the room.  She’s heard the testimony now.  She had her chance to testify, and that was
part of the reason for putting her on.  You will have an opportunity here to augment the record before
I get done with this.  But you may not put [Applicant’s wife] back on the stand.  Any more evidence
from you?” 
On page 89, the Judge was discussing items that might be submitted after the hearing, the
attorney interjected a question and the Judge said “Anything else, I’m just listing the things that
cause me heartburn.  If there are things that you think will be helpful to your client, by all means,
submit them, as long as its done by the close of business on the 27th.  I do note in making the offer
that the Applicant has had the SOR for more than a year.”
5
On page 90, the Judge (properly) decided to amend the SOR to include a bankruptcy that had
not been part of the SOR before.  At that point, Applicant’s attorney asked for a written amendment
to the SOR and an opportunity to respond to the amendment, at which point the Judge said, “Motion
denied.  I’m amending the SOR to allege that on or about March 9, 2018, the Applicant filed a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition as encapsulated in Applicant’s Exhibit I. . . .”  After further
discussion the Judge again denied the motion on page 92.  No written amendment was put in the
record.
The Judge’s  ruling against providing the SOR amendment in writing to Applicant’s attorney
and against providing time for a response run against the spirit if not the plain language of the second
sentence of Directive ¶ E3.1.17: When such amendments are made, the Administrative Judge may
grant either party’s request for such additional time as the Administrative Judge may deem
appropriate for further preparation or other good cause.
The Judge’s approach to sequestering Applicant’s wife, instructing her to “wheel yourself
back to the back of the hearing room and remain, as long as it takes[ ,]” later prohibiting her from
offering additional testimony, then prohibiting the attorney from finding out what she wanted to
address, and his implying, contrary to the record, that it was the attorney’s decision to have her stay
in the room are deeply troubling.  Proceedings at DOHA are subject to reasonable rules and
procedures.  However some flexibility is often accorded persons with disabilities or special needs. 
In isolation none of the Judge’s pertinent rulings or comments might have been worthy of note, in
combination they smack of either bias or the arbitrary wielding of authority.
Cumulatively, the issues I have noted justify remand to another Judge.  Especially since
Applicant and his wife have had an usually rough medical history and concomitant financial
difficulties.  It is quite plausible that another Judge would analyze this record differently.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
6
