1 
 
                    
                  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
                                          
      
         
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03770 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/10/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD.1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 22, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 1, 2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 27, 2018, scheduling the hearing for December 14, 2018.  
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about the People’s Republic of China (China). The 
request was not admitted in evidence but was appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of 
Fact, below. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which I 
admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 2, 2019.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is 48 years old, married, and he 
has two minor children. His wife was born in China and immigrated to the United States 
in 1996. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and their children are native-born U.S. 
citizens. He has owned a home in the United States since 2005.2 
 Applicant was born in China. He graduated from a high school in China in 1988, 
and he obtained a bachelor’s degree from a university in China in 1993. He immigrated 
to the United States in 1996 and was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2008. He obtained 
a master’s degree from a U.S. university in 2002. He has worked as a systems engineer 
for his current employer, a DOD contractor, since 2016. He was granted access to 
public trust information in 2011. He has never held a DOD security clearance.3  
 Applicant’s mother, father, sister, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are citizens 
and residents of China. His mother and father are 75 and 82 years old, respectively. His 
mother retired as a school teacher at age 60. His father retired as a research institute 
professor between the age of 65 and 70. Applicant was unaware whether the research 
institute was affiliated with the Chinese government. Applicant testified that his father 
has never served in the Chinese military.4   
 
 
 Applicant’s parents live together in an apartment they own, the value of which 
Applicant was unaware. They are supported by their monthly pensions from the 
Chinese government, totaling approximately $1,600 monthly. Applicant talks to his 
mother weekly, primarily to check on her health as she was diagnosed with cancer. He 
talks to his father four to five times yearly. He visits his parents in China once every two 
years and last did so in August 2018. He usually travels to China with his wife and 
children. His mother visited Applicant and his family in the United States in 2016. He 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 6-7, 10-11, 14-16, 25-29, 37, 47-48; GE 1; AE A, B, C, D. 
 
3 Tr. at 14-16, 25-29, 50-52; GE 1; AE A, E. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-37, 46-47, 52-60; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
 
3 
 
sent his parents approximately $1,000 in 2000, and he sends his mother vitamin 
supplements that he buys in the United States. He testified that his parents are aware 
only that he is an engineer.5  
 
 Applicant’s sister is 47 years old. She is married, and her husband is 48 years 
old. They are joint owners of a private business, having applied for and received their 
business license from the Chinese government. Applicant testified that his brother-in-
law never served in the Chinese military, but previously worked for the Chinese 
government. When Applicant visits their parents in China, his sister makes the short trip 
to their parents’ hometown so that Applicant can also see her.  Applicant talks to her 
four to five times yearly.6 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are ages 74 and 75, respectively. 
They are both retired. They live together in an apartment, the value of which Applicant 
was unaware. They are also supported by their pensions from the Chinese government. 
His mother-in-law previously worked as a school teacher. His father-in-law previously 
worked as a general manager of a private travel agency and a school teacher. Applicant 
testified that neither served in the Chinese military. Applicant speaks to his parents-in-
law two to three times yearly. His wife speaks to her parents weekly. Applicant and his 
wife visit her parents in China once every two years, when they visit his parents.7  
 
 Applicant has two sisters-in-law, one of whom resides in China and the other in 
Canada. The sister-in-law in China does not work outside of the home, and her husband 
is a small business owner. Applicant was unaware how often his wife spoke to her sister 
in China. He testified that he does not have any connection to either sister-in-law. He 
testified that he was unaware whether his wife ever discussed with her family in China 
the nature of his employment or that he is seeking a security clearance.8 
  
 Applicant maintains contact with friends who are citizens and residents of China. 
He has known three to four of such friends since kindergarten. One is a stockbroker; the 
second works in information technology for an insurance company; the third is an 
assistant professor; and the fourth one is unemployed. He sees them when he travels to 
China to visit his parents, and he saw three of them during his August 2018 trip. In 
addition, Applicant has known three to four other such friends since high school and 
college. One works for a bank; two are professors at a local college; and the fourth is a 
nurse at a local hospital. He also saw these friends when he visited China in August 
2018.9 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 29-37, 46-47, 52-60, 64-66; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
6 Tr. at 35-37, 46-47, 59-60; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
7 Tr. at 37-40, 47, 61-65; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. at 37-40, 47, 61-65; GE 2; AE E. 
 
9 Tr. at 40-46, 63-64; GE 2; AE E. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s home was valued at $560,000 as of the date of the hearing. He and 
his wife’s checking, savings, and retirement accounts in the United States total 
approximately $1,000,000. They do not have any foreign assets. His July 2016 
background interview reflects that he told the investigator that he is loyal solely to the 
United States. He testified that he is proud to be an American.10 
  
China 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China as among the 
most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or email.  
Chinese attempts to collect U.S. economic and technological information will continue at 
a high level and will represent a growing threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of 
the cyber threat will evolve with continuing technological advances in the global 
information environment. China’s military modernization is targeting capabilities with the 
potential to degrade core U.S. military-technological advances.  
 
 China is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party is the 
paramount authority, with its members holding almost all top government and security 
apparatus positions. Humans rights concerns observed in 2017 included arbitrary or 
unlawful deprivation of life; executions without due process; forced disappearances; 
torture and coerced confessions of prisoners; arbitrary detention; illegal detention at 
unofficial holding facilities; significant restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
assembly, religion, and movement. Authorities continued to maintain ultimate authority 
over all published, online, and broadcast material. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms, offices, cars, taxis, telephones, internet usage, and fax 
machines may be monitored onsite or remotely. Personal possessions in hotel rooms, 
including computers, may be searched without knowledge or consent.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 46-50; GE 1, 2; AE A, B. 
 
5 
 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, parents-in-law, and friends are citizens and residents 
of China. China has been identified as among the most aggressive collectors of U.S. 
economic information and technology. China’s intelligence services frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to steal secrets. Visitors to China may be placed under surveillance, and 
personal possessions in hotel rooms may be searched without knowledge or consent. 
Applicant’s foreign contacts in China create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
7 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, parents-in-law, and friends are Chinese citizens 
residing in China. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in 
the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e). Applicant regularly contacts his 
parents, sister, and parents-in-law. His wife also does the same with her parents. 
Applicant also sees his friends in China when he travels there to visit his family. AG ¶ 
8(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1996. He obtained a master’s 
degree from a U.S. university in 2002. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. 
His wife is also a naturalized U.S. citizen, and their children are native-born U.S 
citizens. They own a home and have substantial financial interests in the United States 
and none in China. These are factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, 
Applicant’s ties to his family in China are equally as strong. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden to demonstrate that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered Applicant’s access to public trust information since 2011. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating 
all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has no t  
mitigated the security concerns raised by his family and friends in China. Accordingly, 
I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
