 
                                
1 
 
                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-03884 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Moira Modzelewski, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John V. Berry, Esq. 
05/10/2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 10, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 4, 2019, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 12, 
2019, and the case was assigned to me on February 28, 2019. On March 4, 2019, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
 
scheduled for March 28, 2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of three other witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 
A through D, which were admitted without objection.1 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on April 11, 2019. 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. At the hearing, I granted 
Department Counsel’s motion to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.c. (Tr. 8.) Applicant’s admissions in 
his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been married 
for 21 years and has two daughters, ages 12 and 7. (Tr. 14.) He has been employed by 
defense contractors since 2015, working as a lead test engineer, acquisition analyst, and 
a U.S. Navy subject-matter expert on a contract supporting the U.S. Army. (AX D; Tr. 18.) 
He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from August 1994 to August 2014, when he 
retired as a lieutenant commander. (AX A-9.) During his active-duty service, Applicant 
received the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, four awards of the Navy and Marine 
Corps Commendation Medal, two awards of the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement 
Medal, and various service medals and qualification badges. (GX A-8.) 
 
 In March 2006, while Applicant was attending a one-year course of instruction at 
a mid-level service school, he was found to have plagiarized a one-page book report. 
According to Applicant, he completed reading the book two days before the book report 
was due and began working on the book report on the evening before it was due. He 
came home from an off-duty masters-degree course at about 9:30 p.m., was involved in 
a long argument with his wife, and did not begin working on the book report until midnight.3 
He found two online summaries of the book, and he copied one of them into his book 
report without footnoting it. He paraphrased the other summary. When he was confronted 
with the apparent plagiarism, he admitted it. (Tr. 24-26.) Although Applicant completed all 
the academic requirements for the course, he was not allowed to graduate. (GX 3 through 
6.) However, he was able to use the academic credits from the service school to earn a 
master’s degree from a civilian university. (AX C; Tr. 28-29.) 
 
 After his tour of duty at the service school, Applicant was assigned overseas for 
one year in an area where his wife, who was then pregnant, and his daughter could not 
                                                          
1 AX A-2 through A-7 are duplicates of statements submitted with Applicant’s answer to the SOR. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 Applicant and his wife were having marital difficulties due to her unhappiness about being uprooted for a 
one-year assignment and his work schedule, which consisted of about eight hours a day in military classes 
and four and a half hours in the evening in master’s degree classes. (Tr. 23-24.) 
 
accompany him. He was depressed by his experience at the service school and the family 
separation, and he drank heavily. Nevertheless, he worked hard to overcome the negative 
information in his service record so that he could remain in the Navy and be entrusted 
with a good assignment. (Tr. 51.) An Air Force major general, for whom he worked, 
submitted a letter describing Applicant’s performance as “stellar.” He stated that Applicant 
was embarrassed, deeply remorseful, had served with distinction, and had “demonstrated 
the character required of leadership and the moral fortitude to serve.” (AX A-2.)  
3 
 
 
After completing his one-year unaccompanied assignment, Applicant was 
reassigned to a major Navy command in another foreign country. He began binge drinking 
in September 2008, and in November 2008, he was detained by local police for drunk 
driving. The local police turned him over to U.S. military authorities. A Navy admiral 
imposed nonjudicial punishment, which consisted of a letter of reprimand. (GX 2.) 
 
 Applicant was required to complete a six-week Substance Abuse Rehabilitation 
Program. (Tr. 33.) He began attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings twice a 
week while overseas, and he attended them daily for a year and a half after he returned 
to the United States. He reduced his attendance to once a month and now attends when 
he needs it. As of the date of the hearing, he had abstained from alcohol since September 
30, 2009. (Tr. 33-37.) His marriage is strong, and his wife is now his “sounding board” 
and part of his support structure. (Tr. 79.) 
 
 In April 2010, Applicant was reassigned to duty in the United States. He anticipated 
the periodic review of his security clearance, and he contacted his security officer to 
ensure that the information in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) was 
correct. He noted that the nonjudicial punishment for drunk driving was not reflected, and 
he self-reported it. (Tr. 39.) 
 
After Applicant’s retirement, he was employed by a defense contractor until he was 
terminated in August 2015. The notice of termination states that he was terminated for 
“failure to uphold the firm’s time reporting policy.” (GX 7.) It does not recite any specific 
failures or the nature of the failures. The termination notice stated that he was not eligible 
for rehire.  
 
An audit of Applicant’s time reporting was triggered after he used a mobile 
application to report his time. He found the mobile application difficult to use because it 
was hard to see and use the keys. On one day, he accidently entered nine hours of work 
when he worked only eight, and on another day in the same pay period he entered eight 
hours of work when he should have entered eight hours of leave. His supervisor caught 
the errors but could not change them because the time card had already been submitted. 
Instead, his supervisor reported the discrepancies, and an investigation of Applicant’s 
time reports followed. (Tr. 41.)  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he was informed that an audit of 
badge records showed that he worked 205.5 hours less that what he claimed to have 
worked during January to July 2015. He requested an opportunity to review the badge 
 
records. His employer declined his request but informed him that he could obtain the 
badge records from the Navy. Although it appears that the badge records were 
considered by the employer’s disciplinary committee, they were not included in the 
evidence submitted by Department Counsel or Applicant. The record contains no 
documentary evidence of the badge records or any other documentation of the basis for 
his employer’s decision to terminate him. 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that he obtained the badge records from the Navy, and he 
concluded that there was a problem with the badging system in the Navy building where 
he worked. He testified that he asked his employer about an opportunity to respond to the 
allegations, and he was informed that he would not have an opportunity to appear before 
the disciplinary committee or to present evidence. (Tr. 44-45.) He testified that he had 
only three days from when he received the badge records until he was summoned to the 
meeting at which he was informed of his termination. He did not have sufficient time to 
compile evidence showing that he was at work on the days which the badge records 
showed him as absent. He was working on a high-profile, voluminous war-game 
handbook that required long hours, and he is confident that his absence would have been 
noted if he had been absent for over 200 hours. (Tr. 74-77.) 
 
After Applicant was terminated, he was hired as a subcontractor for the former 
employer who terminated him. Applicant was able to retain his security clearance 
because his former employer approved his employment as a subcontractor and 
sponsored him for a clearance. (Tr. 21.) He worked as a subcontractor for his former 
employer from mid-November 15, 2015 to October 31, 2016. (Tr. 49.) 
 
When Applicant applied for unemployment benefits, the state employment 
commission determined that his former employer had failed to provide sufficient evidence 
to support a finding of willful misconduct. The commission’s written decision does not 
address whether the evidence supported a “failure to uphold the firm’s time reporting 
policy” (the language used in the notice of termination) based on conduct not amounting 
to willful misconduct. The commission determined that Applicant was qualified for 
unemployment benefits. (Applicant’s Exhibit A-10.) 
 
 A close friend of Appellant who has known him for more than 30 years testified 
and submitted a statement on his behalf. The friend noticed that Applicant was drinking 
heavily before the plagiarism and DUI incidents, and the DUI was the trigger for changing 
his drinking habits. Now that Applicant has stopped drinking, he has become more 
positive and more involved with his family. The friend considers Applicant trustworthy, 
honest, and a “solid guy.” (AX A-3; Tr. 83-88.) 
 
 The owner of the company for which Applicant was an acquisition analyst testified 
and submitted a statement. Applicant told him about the incidents in the SOR. This 
witness described Applicant as an “exceptional employee.” He regards Applicant as 
direct, honest, and loyal. He has no hesitation in recommending that Applicant retain his 
security clearance. (AX A-5; Tr. 90-95.) 
 
 A retired Navy captain, who is a defense contractor for whom Appellant previously 
worked, testified and submitted a statement. The Navy captain was instrumental in 
persuading the employer who terminated Applicant to accept him as a subcontractor and 
sponsor him for a clearance. The Navy captain has no concerns about Applicant’s 
character, integrity, or trustworthiness. He regards Applicant as a “straight arrow” and he 
would trust him with his life. He testified that “common sense” would suggest that 
Applicant could not have been absent for almost five weeks with no one noticing. He also 
found it “remarkable” that the employer who fired Applicant accepted him as a 
subcontractor and facilitated the continuance of his security clearance. (AX A-6; Tr. 96-
109.) 
5 
 
 
 A retired Navy chief petty officer submitted a statement describing how Applicant 
persuaded him to enlist in the Navy and how Applicant helped him gain control of his 
alcohol problems in later life. He considers Applicant straightforward, honest, and 
trustworthy. (AX A-4.) 
 
 A long-time friend of Applicant, who has known him since high school and has 
been employed as an attorney for a government agency since 2010, submitted a 
statement. She is aware that Applicant is a recovering alcoholic. She considers him 
straightforward, honest, and trustworthy. (AX A-7.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
6 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was guilty of plagiarism in 2006, while a student 
at a military school, and he was not allowed to graduate (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges that 
he received nonjudicial punishment for drunk driving in November 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
Finally, it alleges that Applicant was terminated from employment by a defense contractor 
for falsifying his time card (SOR ¶ 1.d). 4 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .” The relevant disqualifying 
conditions are: 
                                                          
4 For reasons not reflected in the record, the SOR is more specific than the notice of termination. 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations; and (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or 
other employer's time or resources.  
 
 Applicant’s plagiarism alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and the DUI alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b are 
established by the evidence and are sufficient to establish AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d). The 
plagiarism and DUI were previously considered and favorably adjudicated.  
 
 The trigger for revoking Applicant’s clearance was his termination for failing to 
follow his employer’s time-reporting requirements. The record does not reflect what 
evidence the employer considered to support termination. After Applicant obtained the 
Navy’s badge records, he did not dispute that they showed more than 200 hours less than 
the work he reported, but he asserted that it was a badging problem that generated 
inaccurate information. He produced no evidence supporting his assertion. However, it is 
significant that the state employment commission investigated the basis for Applicant’s 
termination and found insufficient evidence to warrant a finding of willful misconduct. It is 
also significant that the employer who fired him allowed him to work as a subcontractor 
and facilitated the reactivation of his security clearance. While Applicant may have been 
careless or inept in submitting his time reports, the evidence is insufficient to establish 
intentional falsification, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. An unintentional or innocent falsification 
would not raise a security concern.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate 
 
8 
 
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(f): the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is established for the plagiarism and the DUI, which are mitigated by 
the passage of time. AG ¶ 17(d) is established for the DUI, because Applicant obtained 
counseling, became involved in AA, and has abstained from alcohol for more than nine 
years. AG ¶ 17(f) is established for Applicant’s termination for falsifying his time card, 
which is unsubstantiated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).5  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I found that Applicant was remorseful, candid, 
sincere, and credible at the hearing. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Withdrawn 
 
                                                          
5 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
