 
1 
 
                                                              
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-01599 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
05/13/2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He provided sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate 
his history of financial problems, which are now largely resolved. Accordingly, this case 
is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Standard Form (SF) 86, Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions, the official form used for personnel security investigations, 
on September 6, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as a security clearance 
application. Thereafter, on May 25, 2017, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement 
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the 
           
             
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1. 
 
 
2 
 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. The SOR is 
similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 13, 2017. He admitted the four delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR and provided brief explanations for each debt. He also 
requested an in-person hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on October 13, 2017. The hearing scheduled for 
January 23, 2018, was postponed due to a government shutdown. The hearing took 
place as rescheduled on April 18, 2018. Applicant appeared without counsel. 
Department Counsel offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 1-
4. Applicant made an oral presentation and offered documentary exhibits, which were 
admitted as Exhibits A-E. No witnesses were called other than Applicant.  
  
The record was kept open until May 18, 2018, to allow Applicant an opportunity 
to submit additional matters. He made a timely submission on May 7, 2018, and those 
matters, along with accompanying e-mails, are admitted without objections as Exhibit F.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance 
previously granted to him. He is employed as a weapons and communications operator 
for a company in the defense industry. He has been so employed since 2011, and his 
place of work is a military proving ground. His formal education includes a bachelor’s 
degree awarded in 2013. He and his wife have three children, ages 10, 6, and 1. His 
employment history includes honorable service on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps 
during 2006-2010, which included a deployment to Iraq. His wife is a military veteran 
too.  
 
The SOR concerns four delinquent debts consisting of two charged-off accounts 
owed to the same credit union, a $1,330 collection account stemming from a credit card 
account, and a $91 medical collection account for a total of about $14,059. He disclosed 
the debts in his September 2016 security clearance application. He also disclosed a 
past-due mortgage loan that had been resolved by modification of the loan. He 
attributed his financial problems to the 2014 timeframe when he and his wife went from 
four streams of income or paychecks to one. They had four streams of income based on 
their jobs and both received GI Bill benefits as they were attending school. The 
reduction in income occurred when he graduated and his wife lost her job and 
postponed attending school. They quickly found themselves over their heads with the 
single paycheck from Applicant’s job. The status of the four delinquent debts is 
discussed below. 
 
Charged-off loans for $8,160 and $4,478 obtained from same credit union.2 The 
initial loan was made to finance the purchase of the car, and then another personal loan 
                                                          
2 Exhibits B – E.  
 
 
3 
 
was made, but it was secured by the car too. After defaulting on the loans, Applicant 
voluntarily returned the vehicle, and the balances owed were charged off. The creditor 
union then obtained a judgment in the amount of $13,436 plus $959 in attorney fees for 
a total of $14,395 in November 2016. The judgment was paid and satisfied via a writ of 
garnishment on both Applicant’s and his wife’s paychecks, and the writ of garnishment 
was released in February 2018. 
 
Collection account for $1,330. This debt stemmed from a credit card account that 
was opened to finance the purchase of automobile tires. By the time the debt came to 
Applicant’s attention, they were in their period of financial difficulty and unable to pay it. 
Since then, the balance on the account grew to more than $2,000, which Applicant 
resolved by agreeing to pay $1,450 in May 2018.3 
 
Medical collection account for $91. Applicant was unaware of the debt until he 
submitted his 2016 security clearance application. He paid the debt in July 2017.4 
 
In addition to the four delinquent accounts in the SOR, an April 2018 credit report 
shows an unpaid medical collection account for $2,197. Applicant explained this debt 
stemmed from an injury he sustained while operating a Bradley Fighting Vehicle at 
work.5 He understands the debt is covered by the state’s workers’ compensation system 
and will be resolved in due course.6 
 
Applicant earned a gross income of about $53,000 in 2017.7 His wife had 
recently accepted a full-time teaching position to begin in fall 2018; previously she 
worked as a teacher’s aide.8 He described their current financial situation as “much 
more stable,” he has a $1,000 set aside for an emergency fund, and their joint checking 
account had a balance of about $1,500.9 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
                                                          
3 Exhibit F.  
 
4 Exhibit F.  
 
5 Tr. 42-46.  
 
6 Exhibit F.  
 
7 Tr. 37.  
 
8 Tr. 37-38. 
 
9 Tr. 51-52.  
 
 
4 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.10 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.11 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”12 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.13 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.14 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.15 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.16 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.17 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.18 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.19 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.20 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
11 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
12 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
13 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
15 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
16 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
19 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
20 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
 
5 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .21 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial 
problems that is sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. The two 
disqualifying conditions noted above apply to this case.  
 
 Concerning the evidence in extenuation and mitigation, Applicant receives credit 
under both AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d). His financial problems stemmed from a reduction in 
household income. In particular, his wife’s job loss and her decision to postpone 
attending school (via the GI Bill benefits) were unexpected events that resulted in a 
reduction of household income. More to the point, Applicant took sufficient action to 
resolve the four delinquent accounts in the SOR. Perhaps he could have acted sooner, 
                                                          
21 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
but his ability (cash flow) to do so was no doubt limited by the demands of supporting 
his spouse and three children. His financial situation is now improved, he has stable 
employment, and his spouse is transitioning into a full-time job. Taken together, it 
appears he has done a good job at putting his financial house in order.   
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. I 
conclude that he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -- 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
