 
1 
 
                                      
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
     
       
           
             
 
                        
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-04065 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
The Edmunds Law Firm 
 
 
May 29, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns related to foreign influence raised by the presence 
of his family members in Iraq. His request for national security eligibility and a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 20, 2017. (Government Exhibit 1.) On December 15, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
 
2 
 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position, effective within the 
Department of Defense on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on March 26, 2018. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 5, 
2018, scheduling the hearing for May 22, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection. The Government also submitted Government Exhibit 4 for 
Administrative Notice. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant 
Exhibits A through I, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 7, 2018. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Republic of Iraq (Iraq). Department Counsel provided an eight-page 
summary of the facts, supported by eight Government documents pertaining to Iraq, 
identified as Government Exhibit 4. The documents provide elaboration and context for 
the summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government 
reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. (Tr. 11.) 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 35 years old, divorced, and has three children. He is applying for 
national security eligibility and a security clearance in connection with his employment 
with a defense contractor as a linguist.  
 
Paragraph 1 – Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
 Applicant was born in Iraq in 1982. Beginning in 2006, after the invasion of Iraq, 
Applicant worked with the Multi-National Force in Iraq as a linguist. He worked with 
various American units in Iraq until 2010. During that time he experienced combat. 
(Applicant Exhibits B, C, and D; Tr. 17-18, 20, 39-40.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States under a Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) 
in 2010. He was granted this status under a program that allowed a small number of 
translators, who had worked with the U.S. military in Iraq, and met certain requirements, 
to immigrate to the United States. Two requirements of the program are, “The individual 
has provided faithful and valuable service to the United States Government,” and “The 
individual . . . has experienced or is experiencing an ongoing serious threat as a 
consequence of the employment by or on behalf of the United States Government.” 
Applicant received a credible threat in 2008, which was documented by an American 
Army unit commander. (Applicant Exhibits B and F; Tr. 19-20, 41.)1 
 
 After immigrating to the United States in 2010, Applicant worked in private 
industry outside the defense field. He also attended college. He started working for a 
defense contractor in 2017, and is currently stationed in Jordan as a linguist. 
(Government Exhibit 1 at Section 13A; Applicant Exhibits A and C; Tr. 20-21, 24, 35.) 
  
 Applicant became a naturalized American citizen on October 23, 2015. Applicant 
renounced his Iraqi citizenship when he became an American citizen. He has no Iraqi 
identification of any type. Applicant has no financial contacts with Iraq. His savings are 
in the United States. (Applicant Exhibits G and H; Tr. 33-35.) 
 
 Applicant married his wife in 2006, and they were divorced in 2017. They had 
one child in Iraq, and the other two children were born in the United States. Applicant’s 
wife and children continue to reside in the United States. As far as Applicant knows, his 
wife has no plans to move back to Iraq. Applicant would not allow his children to leave 
the United States. (Government Exhibit 1 at Sections 8 and 17; Tr. 24-26, 44-47.) 
 
 Applicant has had no contact with his ex-wife’s family since their divorce two 
years ago. During their marriage Applicant’s contact with his in-laws was minimal. (Tr. 
23-26.) 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. His mother now lives in the United States, as 
does his younger brother. He has two older brothers. None of his relatives have 
knowledge of Applicant’s job, or the fact that he is applying for a security clearance. 
(Government Exhibit 1 at Section 18; Tr. 31-33.) 
 
 As stated, Applicant has two older brothers that continue to reside in Iraq. He has 
recently had contact with them once or twice a year. Neither of his brothers have any 
relation to the Iraqi government. (Government Exhibit 3; Tr. 21-23, 41-42.) 
 
 Applicant has two uncles, one from each side of his family, who continue to 
reside in Iraq. One of these uncles is a retired senior officer in the Iraqi military. 
Applicant last had contact with this uncle 10 to 15 years ago, before he began work as a 
linguist. The other uncle was at one time an advisor to the Iraqi government. Once 
again, Applicant’s last contact with this person was 10 to 15 years ago. Applicant is not 
                                                          
1 See Department of State, Special Immigrant Visas (SIVs) for Iraqi and Afghan Translators/Interpreters, 
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/us-visas/immigrate/siv-iraqi-afghan-translators-interpreters.html 
(accessed May 21, 2019). 
 
4 
 
sure of their current positions, since he has had no relationship with either of them for 
many years. (Tr. 27-31, 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant filled out a counterintelligence-focused security screening 
questionnaire in 2017. (Government Exhibit 2.) He was also interviewed by an 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management in 2017. (Government Exhibit 3.) 
The information provided by Applicant during these occasions was consistent with his 
testimony during the hearing. 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant is proud to be an American citizen, and to have assisted the U.S. 
military in Iraq. He feels no sense of loyalty to Iraq, stating, “All I know now is my loyalty 
to the United States.” (Applicant Exhibit I; Tr. 36-38.) 
 
 Applicant is a highly respected and successful linguist. This is shown by letters of 
appreciation and certificates of achievement presented to him with regard to his work in 
Iraq in the period from 2006 through 2010. Applicant’s work during that time is 
described by one officer as participation in “neighborhood clearances, as well as 
countless combat patrols in a variety of densely populated neighborhoods in Baghdad.” 
The officer goes to state that Applicant was “always prepared to perform his duties 
despite enemy contact on several occasions.” (Applicant Exhibits B and C.)  
 
 Applicant continued to do outstanding work in his current assignment in Jordan. 
This is attested to by the letter of recommendation from the commander of the unit he 
supported. (Applicant Exhibit A.) 
 
 Applicant is very aware of his responsibilities if he obtains a security clearance, 
particularly if advances are made toward him or his relatives. (Tr. 25-26.) 
 
Iraq 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s 
new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains 
engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. 
Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, 
and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (Government Exhibit 6: 
Attachments.) 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines 
 
5 
 
(AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to 
be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks national security eligibility enters into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 - Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant has two brothers and two uncles who live in Iraq. Several family 
members of his ex-wife also reside in Iraq. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
Iraq has significant internal anti-western terrorism threats that operate openly and 
contrary to U.S. interests. Accordingly, Applicant’s family connections in that country 
have the potential to generate a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a).2 
 
                                                          
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant has minimal contact with his family members who live in Iraq. In 
addition, he has no contact with the family members of his ex-wife who reside in Iraq. 
He is a proud American citizen, and he feels he has succeeded in this country on his 
own, without help from anyone. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) apply. 
 
Applicant is knowledgeable about his security responsibilities, and evinced a 
credible intent to rebuff any attempts by foreign actors to influence him. AG ¶ 8(e) 
applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant served in Iraq without any indication that he had breached security 
policies or procedures. There is considerable evidence that he acted courageously in a 
particularly difficult and dangerous job. While that fact is not normally a factor in granting 
a clearance, the Appeal Board stated in ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 
14, 2006) the following: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures significant probative value 
for purposes of refuting, mitigating or extenuating security concerns raised 
by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances. 
See e.g. ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR 
Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-
10955 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). However, the Board has recognized an 
exception to that general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant 
has established by credible, independent evidence that his compliance 
with security procedures and regulations occurred in the context of 
dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the Applicant had made a 
significant impact to the national security. See e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-
12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances 
can give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or 
exploitation. 
 
I have carefully considered the fact that Applicant’s two uncles held senior 
positions with various governmental entities in Iraq several years ago. In this particular 
case, I find that Applicant has mitigated the security significance arising from their 
presence for the following reasons. Applicant has been subject to considerable 
screening for his various jobs, as well as his entry into the United States under the SIV 
program. He consistently has identified his uncles and their jobs. He was admitted to 
the United States under the SIV program, which had strict rules. The mitigating 
evidence makes clear that Applicant behaved courageously while helping the coalition 
forces in Iraq in a substantial way. Applicant has completely mitigated the security 
significance of the presence of his relations in Iraq. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(b), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant was born and raised in Iraq. From 2006 through 2010 he worked 
successfully for coalition forces in Iraq under frequently dangerous conditions. He has 
successfully worked as a linguist supporting American forces and interests in Jordan 
since 2017. Based on his work, Applicant received a Special Immigrant Visa. Applicant 
has shown himself to be a talented and patriotic American citizen and member of the 
defense industry. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States due to his sense of loyalty to the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility and a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
