 
1 
 
                                
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
                              
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02590 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.   
 
05/29/2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She provided sufficient evidence to explain and 
mitigate her history of financial problems. Accordingly, this case is decided for 
Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Standard Form (SF) 86, Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions, the official form used for personnel security investigations, 
on June 25, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as a security clearance 
application. Thereafter, on August 24, 2017, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement 
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1. 
 
 
2 
 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. The SOR is 
similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 19, 2017. Her answers were mixed 
and included brief explanations for each debt. She also requested an in-person hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2017. The hearing scheduled for 
January 24, 2018, was postponed due to a government shutdown. The hearing took 
place as rescheduled on April 18, 2018. Applicant appeared with counsel. Department 
Counsel offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 1-8. Applicant 
offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits A-S. No witnesses were 
called other than Applicant.  
  
The record was kept open until May 18, 2018, to allow Applicant an opportunity 
to submit additional matters. She made a timely submission, and those matters are 
admitted without objections as Exhibits T-Y.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance 
previously granted to her. She is employed as a software engineer for a company in the 
defense industry. She has been so employed since 2005. Her job includes managing 15 
employees who are building software products for customers. Her formal education 
includes a bachelor’s degree in computer science. She has two adult children, a 24-
year-old son attending law school and a 23-year-old daughter attending pharmacy 
school. A native of India, Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1990, and she 
became a U.S. citizen in 2001. Likewise, her husband is a native of India and a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant and her husband met and married in the United 
States.   
 
The SOR concerns 11 delinquent debts for a total amount of about $37,270 and 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case discharged in 2001. Overall, she attributed the financial 
problems to a business failure with her husband’s restaurant, which he operated in 
partnership with another person during 2013-2015, and her husband’s long-standing 
alcoholism and multiple drunk-driving offenses, which were both hidden and unknown to 
her until 2014. Applicant’s marriage was consistent with her Indian culture with her 
husband in charge and responsible for the finances. As a result, Applicant was unaware 
of the financial problems, aside from the bankruptcy, until 2014 when she discovered 
her husband’s problem with alcohol. The matters in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.l are 
discussed seriatim below. 
 
Charged-off unsecured consumer loan for $20,460.2 Applicant settled this 
account for $9,700 in September 2017, which was about 50% of the balance of the 
current principal.  
                                                          
2 Exhibit F.  
 
3 
 
Charged-off credit card account for $4,307.3 Applicant settled this account by 
making six payments for a total of $2,153 during 2017-2018.  
 
Charged-off credit card account for $3,367.4 Applicant settled this account for 
$1,300 in March 2018.  
 
Collection account for $2,460.5 This debt stemmed from an apartment lease for 
her adult children while attending college. The account was resolved with a zero 
balance as of February 2018. 
 
Collection account for a telecommunications bill for $2,189.6 Applicant admits 
she owes something for this account, but she is disputing the balance due with the 
assistance of a credit and debt consulting firm. 
 
Collection account for a telecommunications bill for $1,453.7 This account stems 
from her husband’s business failure. She is working with the credit and debt consulting 
firm to resolve the account. 
 
Collection account for a merchant credit card account for $803.8 This account 
had been in dispute, and with the assistance of the credit and debt consulting firm, 
Applicant settled the account for the lesser amount of $440 in May 2018. 
 
Charged-off account for a consumer account for $287.9 This account had been in 
dispute, and with the assistance of the credit and debt consulting firm, Applicant settled 
the account for the lesser amount of $127 in May 2018.   
 
Medical collection account for $265.10 Applicant believes this account should 
have been paid by her health insurance, she is attempting to validate the account, and 
she will pay it if the account is verified.  
 
Charged-off merchant credit card account for $819. This account is a duplicate of 
the account in SOR ¶ 1.g. 
 
                                                          
3 Exhibit G.  
 
4 Exhibit H.  
 
5 Exhibit I.  
 
6 Exhibits J and V. 
 
7 Exhibits K and W. 
 
8 Exhibits L, M, and Y.  
 
9 Exhibits N and U.  
 
10 Tr. 49-51.  
 
 
4 
 
Collection account for telecommunications account for $860.11 This account has 
been in dispute, and Applicant is working with the credit and debt consulting firm to 
resolve it. 
 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case filed in 2000 and discharged in 2001. This case 
started as a Chapter 13 case, also called a wage earner’s plan, filed in 1998 to allow 
Applicant and her husband to repay debt per a court-approved payment plan. It was 
necessitated when her husband lost his job. Applicant made the monthly payments until 
she lost her job. As a result, the bankruptcy case was converted to a Chapter 7 case, 
which ended in discharge.  
 
In addressing the indebtedness, Applicant’s plan or strategy has been to take 
one account at a time usually focusing on the account with the highest balance.12 To 
that end, she has taken on freelance work as a cook for large events (e.g., weddings) 
and banquets to earn additional money used to pay off debt. Her annual salary with her 
employer is about $140,000, and her husband earns about $40,000 annually as a part-
time software engineer. He has had difficulty keeping a job due to his long-standing 
alcoholism. She participates in her employer’s 401(k) plan. Her first and second monthly 
mortgage payments of about $3,700 are current. She does not have a car loan. In 
addition to working with the credit and debt consulting firm, she had credit counseling in 
April 2018, and she retained the services of a financial counseling firm in early 2018 
with the goals of reducing debt and improving her credit score.13 
 
Applicant assumed control and responsibility for the household finances in about 
2014-2015.14 She described the process of learning about her husband’s long-standing 
alcoholism and multiple drunk-driving offenses as shocking.15 She only learned about 
his husband’s problems in 2014, when a counselor at a treatment center called her and 
invited her to a meeting with her husband.16 Records indicate that Applicant’s husband 
has had residential treatment multiple times for varying lengths beginning in December 
2007 with the most recent stay in 2017.17 She reports that her husband is now sober 
and is working part-time as a software engineer.18  
 
                                                          
11 Exhibits O and X.  
 
12 Tr. 37-40.  
 
13 Exhibits C, E, and Q.  
 
14 Tr. 56-57.  
 
15 Tr. 59-61.  
 
16 Tr. 71-72.  
 
17 Exhibit D.  
 
18 Tr. 30-31.  
 
 
5 
 
In light of her marital difficulties, Applicant and her husband entered into a written 
agreement in October 2017 to maintain financial stability and guide their marriage.19 
Among other things, they agreed that her husband will remain sober and will provide 
financial support to the family. They also agreed that if her husband fails to maintain his 
sobriety, a formal separation or divorce will follow. Applicant was unequivocal in stating 
that she is firmly committed to initiating a separation or divorce if her husband does not 
adhere to the agreement.20   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.21 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.22 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”23 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.24 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.25 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.26 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.27 
                                                          
19 Exhibit S.  
 
20 Tr. 73-74.  
 
21 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
22 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
23 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
24 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
25 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
26 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
27 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
6 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.28 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.29 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.30 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.31 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .32 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                          
28 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
29 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
30 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
31 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
32 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute of provides 
evidence of actions taken to resolve the issue.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial 
problems that is sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. The two 
disqualifying conditions noted above apply to this case.  
 
 Concerning the evidence in extenuation and mitigation, Applicant receives credit 
under the mitigating conditions mentioned above. The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(a) 
is established because Applicant’s financial problems are largely due to her husband’s 
mishandling of the household finances due to his long-standing alcoholism. Because he 
is now sober and in the marriage under the terms of the written agreement noted above, 
I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems occurred under such circumstances that 
they are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) is established because the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond Applicant’s control. Her 
husband’s business failure and his mishandling of the household finances were largely 
beyond her control given the nature of their marriage and her ignorance of his long-
standing alcoholism and multiple drunk-driving offenses. Since learning about her 
husband’s problems, Applicant has assumed responsibility for handling the household 
finances and is re-establishing their household finances.  
 
 The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(c) is established based on Exhibits C, E, and 
Q. Applicant’s efforts in this regard are ongoing. 
 
 The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(d) is established due to Applicant’s 
substantial work in addressing the past-due debts. As established in the findings of fact, 
she settled 6 of the 11 delinquent accounts. In doing so, she paid approximately 
$16,180 to six creditors.  
 
8 
 
 
 The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(e) is established because Applicant is 
disputing 4 of the 11 delinquent accounts. Moreover, she provided supporting 
documentation regarding three of accounts in dispute, lacking documentation for the 
minor medical collection account for $265.  
 
 Overall, I was impressed by Applicant, by her perseverance under difficult 
circumstances, and by her strength of character she displayed by staying in a marriage 
when many people would have called it quits. No fool, she insisted her husband enter 
into an agreement to guide the future of their marriage. The written agreement is 
essentially a last-chance agreement, which means Applicant is taking the matter quite 
seriously. Although Applicant has not presented a perfect case in mitigation, her case is 
a reminder that resolving difficult financial problems is a process, a process that takes 
time. To date, Applicant has done a good job in resolving the financial problems, and I 
am persuaded she will continue working the process. Likewise, I am persuaded that 
similar problems are unlikely to recur.  
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. I 
conclude that he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -- 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
