1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: 
   
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-04099 
) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
05/14/2019 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On December 17, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 21, 2019, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 26, 2019. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 29, 2019. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on April 17, 2019. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through L. 
There were no objections to any of the exhibits offered, and they were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on April 30, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq. Applicant did not object, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported by source 
documents from official U.S. Government publications.1 The facts are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He never married and has no children. He was born in 
Iraq. He did not serve in the Iraqi military. He was granted a Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) 
in 2010 and immigrated to the United States that same year. He became a naturalized 
citizen of the United States in 2016. He earned an associate’s degree and also became 
a certified technician in a medical specialty in 2016. He worked in that field from May 2016 
to May 2017, when he began training for his current job. Applicant has worked for his 
current employer, a federal contractor, as a linguist in Iraq since June 2017.2  
 
 Applicant worked for U.S. contractors in Iraq at forward operating military bases 
from 2004 to 2010. He lived on base and due to the dangerousness of the missions he 
was assigned, he rarely went home. He testified that on a daily basis he was involved in 
all types of operations and missions, including combat operations. He was also involved 
in the arrest of terrorists. He estimated that from 2004 to 2010, he participated in 800 to 
1,000 missions “outside the wire,” meaning off-base and was subjected to combat 
situations with U.S. military forces. He testified that his unit was attacked on numerous 
occasions. One of the times, he was in a Humvee when it hit an improvised explosive 
device. He also participated in missions where there were casualties.3   
 
 After being granted an SIV for his service and immigrating to the United States, 
Applicant worked from approximately 2011 to 2016 as a security officer and also worked 
a second job as a translator.4 
                                                          
1 Source documents are attached to Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Tr. 18-26; AE F, G, J. 
 
3 Tr. 26-29. 
 
4 Tr. 24-25. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant provided documents to show he renounced his Iraqi citizenship and 
relinquished his expired Iraqi passport.5 He provided a character letter from a military 
officer who is an officer-in-charge and with whom he has worked with in Iraq over the past 
two years. The officer stated that in the time they have worked together, which was daily 
over the past three months, Applicant has worked on escort missions that required a level 
of discretion. Applicant is described as respectful of privacy, protects information, and 
adheres to rules and restrictions. He has an outstanding work ethic and is considered an 
outstanding citizen. He is punctual and does exactly what he is told to do and promptly 
completes the assignment. The officer has great trust and faith in Applicant and his loyalty 
and integrity is beyond reproach.6 
 
 Applicant also provided character letters from those whom he served with before 
immigrating to the United States. They say he served honorably and enabled United 
States forces to successfully accomplish its missions. He was an integral member of a 
platoon, allowing it to successfully engage the local populace and members of the Iraqi 
government. He earned the trust of the Iraqi Army and was a vital link for joint American-
Iraqi cooperation. On multiple occasions, his quick actions and understanding of both 
Iraqi and American cultures assisted in allowing U.S. forces to gain the respect of the 
local populace. He was described as trustworthy and reliable.7  
 
 Another character letter from a military officer that Applicant served with in Iraq 
stated that he was dedicated to his duty and a true professional while working with forces 
in hazardous environments. He aided platoons successfully in their daily combat 
missions. He was considered honest and hard working. 
 
 Applicant has no financial interests in Iraq. He and his brother own a house in the 
United States, which they purchased in 2017. They both pay the mortgage on the house, 
and when Applicant is in the United States, he lives with his brother and his brother’s 
family. He also owns two older model vehicles and a third he owns with his brother. 
Applicant contributes to an Individual Retirement Account. In 2018, he earned 
approximately $73,000 in income. He has approximately $90,000 in a savings account in 
the United States. He intends to retire in the United States.8 
 
 Applicant has three brothers. His brother with whom he purchased a house with, 
immigrated to the United States in 2011 on an SIV, which he obtained because of his 
service to the United States. He is a security officer. His brother and his wife are 
permanent residents of the United States and his brother has applied to be a naturalized 
citizen. He has his interview scheduled in the coming weeks. They have four children.9  
                                                          
5 AE A. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
7 AE D. 
 
8 Tr. 59; AE E, H. 
 
9 Tr. 20-21, 68-71. 
 
4 
 
 
 One brother joined the Iraqi Army in the 1990s. He is a citizen and resident of Iraq. 
Applicant stated that after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the Iraqi security forces were 
dissolved, so his brother was not a part of the army at that time. His brother worked for 
the United States military before returning to the Iraqi Army in approximately 2006 or 
2007. Applicant does not know what his brother’s military occupation is, but believes it is 
administrative. He holds the rank of major. The last time Applicant saw this brother was 
in January 2010. His brother is married with two children. Applicant speaks to him about 
once or twice a year. He last spoke with this brother about three months ago.10 
 
 Another brother of Applicant’s worked as a carpenter for the United States forces 
from 2004 to 2007. He travels to the country of Georgia where he works as a property 
manager of real estate. He also worked in Iraq for the Ministry of Oil and Minerals. He 
has been on leave from this positon for the past four years because the factory is closed. 
He receives partial pay while it is closed. Applicant has only visited this brother once in 
person since 2010. He visited him in Georgia in 2018, because Applicant’s visa expired, 
and Applicant had to leave Iraq. He stayed in Georgia with his brother until his visa was 
renewed. He has quarterly telephonic contact. He provided this brother some money in 
approximately 2014 or 2015, when his brother was in Georgia.11  
 
Applicant has six sisters who are citizens and residents of Iraq. Their information 
is as follows:  
 
Sister #1 was born in 1962 and is married with four children. Applicant’s last 
contact with her was by phone in 2014. Her husband’s occupation is unknown.12  
 
Sister #2 was born in 1964 and is married with children. Applicant does not know 
how many children. He believes her husband works in construction. His last contact with 
her was in 2009.13  
 
Sister #3 was born in 1966. She is a widow with four children. She is also a teacher 
Applicant has not spoken to her since 2015.14 
 
Sister #4 was born in 1968 and is single. She is a teacher and lives in Iraq with 
their two brothers and a sister in the same house. Applicant has not seen her since 2010. 
He last spoke with her about eight months ago by phone. He does not provide her or any 
                                                          
 
10 Tr. 29-33, 42-44. 
 
11 Tr. 34-46; GE 3; AE L. 
 
12 Tr. 49-50; GE 3. 
 
13 Tr. 50-51; GE 3. 
 
14 Tr. 55-56; GE 3. 
 
 
5 
 
 
other siblings financial support, except as noted to above to his one brother. The four 
siblings in Iraq have applied for immigration visas to the United States.15  
 
Sister #5 was born in 1972 and is a teacher. Applicant spoke her with about ten 
months ago. She was not married at the time, but he believes she has subsequently 
married. She lives in Iraq with her brothers and sister. Applicant has contact with her once 
or twice a year.16 
 
Sister #6 was born in 1974. She is a teacher, who is married and has no children. 
Applicant does not know her husband’s occupation. He last spoke to her by phone in 
2014.17  
 
Applicant’s two brothers and two of his sisters moved to another area of Iraq 
because it was safer and away from areas that ISIS had infiltrated. They share living 
quarters.18  
 
Applicant also has a half-sister. She is his mother’s daughter from his mother’s first 
marriage. She was born in 1955. His last contact with her was in 2010. He does not know 
her husband’s occupation.19  
 
Applicant testified that he has supported the United States and its military forces 
for many years. He is loyal to the United States and no other country. He does not intend 
to return to Iraq to live. There is nothing there for him. He said that other than a few phone 
calls to his family there, his life is in the United States. Although not asked to do so, he 
said he is willing to sever all familial ties in Iraq. His current responsibilities in Iraq are to 
escort supply convoys.20  
 
IRAQ 
 
 The United States Department of State warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq remain at 
high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence and to avoid all travel to Iraq. The ability of 
the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens outside Baghdad is 
extremely limited given the security environment. ISIS controls a significant portion of 
Iraq’s territory. Within areas under ISIS control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability 
to control and ensure public safety. 
                                                          
15 Tr. 52, 65-67; GE 3. 
 
16 Tr. 54-55; GE 3. 
 
17 Tr. 53-57; GE 3. 
 
18 Tr. 54-57. 
 
19 Tr. 47-48, 57 58; GE 3. 
 
20 Tr. 65, 71. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Numerous terrorist and insurgent groups are active in Iraq, including ISIS. Such 
groups regularly attack both Iraqi security forces and civilians. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may also threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. U.S. 
Government and western interests remain possible targets for attacks.  
 
 The U.S. Government considers the potential personal security threats to U.S. 
government personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live and work under 
strict security guidelines.  
 
 There are significant human rights problems in Iraq to include: sectarian hostility, 
widespread corruption, lack of transparency at all levels of government and society that 
have weakened the government’s authority and worsened effective human rights 
protections. Iraqi security forces and members of the Federal Police have committed 
human rights violations to include killing, kidnapping, and extorting civilians. There are 
also problems that include harsh and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison 
facilities, arbitrary arrest and lengthy pretrial detainment, denial of fair public trial, limits 
on freedom of expression, freedom of the press, censorship of religion, limits on peaceful 
assembly, and societal abuses of women. ISIS is also responsible for human rights 
abuses. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
 
7 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
8 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Applicant has two brothers who are citizens and residents of Iraq. One brother is 
in the Iraqi Army and the other has ties to the Iraqi Ministry of Oil and Minerals. He has 
six sisters and a half-sister who are citizens and residents of Iraq. Applicant has ties of 
affection to them. He has infrequent contact with some of them throughout the year and 
has not had any contact with others for several years. Applicant’s family residing in Iraq 
creates a heightened risk and a potential foreign influence concern.  
 
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to Iraq 
because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. 
citizens. It also has serious concerns about terrorist activities in Iraq that specifically target 
Americans. There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Iraq because of 
terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has supported the U.S. Government through his work 
as a translator and linguist and is willing to do so in the future. Numerous linguists, 
translators and advisors supporting U.S. forces, have family living in Iraq. Thousands of 
the U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Iraq are targets of 
terrorists along with Iraqi civilians who support the Iraq Government and cooperate with 
coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Iraq with the United States, and 
the situation in Iraq place a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Iraq do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be 
 
9 
 
 
forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a relative 
living in Iraq.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Iraq seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family, 
nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. International 
terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable state 
intelligence services, and Iraq has an enormous problem with terrorism. Applicant’s 
relationships with relatives living in Iraq create a potential conflict of interest because 
terrorists could place pressure on his family living there in an effort to cause Applicant to 
compromise classified information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Substantial 
evidence was produced of Applicant’s contacts with family in Iraq and has raised the issue 
of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s siblings are citizens and residents of Iraq. Several he has not seen for 
many years. He has had infrequent visits with others and talks to them infrequently during 
the year. Applicant’s contact with his family is infrequent, but not casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does 
not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has served in dangerous 
situations with U.S. forces from 2004 to 2010. For his service, he was granted an SIV. He 
returned to serve with U.S. military forces in Iraq in 2017. Applicant served in combat 
operations. Applicant became a U.S. citizen, bought a home, and has considerable 
 
10 
 
 
financial interests in the United States. He lives with a brother who also served with the 
United States forces in Iraq and was granted an SIV.  
 
Applicant’s years of support to the United States military in Iraq as a linguist, 
including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards mitigating security 
concerns. Applicant is currently serving as a linguist for supply convoys in support of the 
U.S. Armed Forces. He continues to support the United States’ goals in Iraq. He has 
expressed his loyalty and commitment to the United States. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and resident of Iraq. Like every other resident of Iraq, any of his relatives who may be 
living in Iraq are at risk from terrorists. 
 
Two of Applicant’s brothers have contacts with government entities in Iraq. One is 
in the Army and another has worked with a ministry department. I have considered these 
contacts. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower 
and money in Iraq, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in Iraq. 
Applicant and his siblings living in Iraq are potential targets of terrorists, and Applicant’s 
potential access to classified information could theoretically add risk to his relatives living 
in Iraq from lawless elements in Iraq.  
 
Applicant’s possible future connections to his relatives living in Iraq are infrequent 
and less significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support 
of the U.S. Government, financial interests and bonds to the United States, performance 
as a linguist to U.S. forces, and U.S. citizenship are important factors weighing towards 
mitigation of security concerns. He owns a house in the United States and has significant 
financial interests. Based on Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationship and loyalty 
to the United States, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully 
overcome and mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
11 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant serves as a linguist for a federal contractor and has actively supported 
the U.S. military mission in Iraq for many years. He understands the risks associated with 
having family in Iraq. Based on Applicant’s past commitment and service under combat 
and dangerous conditions and his continued loyalty to the United States, he has mitigated 
the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
