 
1 
 
                  
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
                                            
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02225 
      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se   
 
 
05/10/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate his 
involvement with marijuana. The most recent incident occurred in January 2017, when 
he knowingly used marijuana at a New Year’s Day party while holding a security 
clearance. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on June 15, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on July 28, 2017, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1.  
 
 
2 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline H for drug involvement and 
substance misuse and Guideline E for personal conduct. The sole allegation under 
Guideline E is simply a cross-allegation of the matters alleged under Guideline H.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 16, 2017. He admitted the SOR 
allegations under Guideline H while not addressing the Guideline E allegation. He 
provided brief explanations for his admissions. And he requested an in-person hearing 
before an administrative judge.   
 
The case was assigned to me on December 13, 2017. The hearing was 
conducted as scheduled on April 19, 2018. Both Department Counsel and Applicant 
offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Government Exhibits 1-4 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits A-Q. The record closed on April 23, 2018, when Applicant 
submitted a post-hearing exhibit, which was admitted without objections as Exhibit R. 
The hearing transcript was received on May 3, 2018.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance 
previously granted to him by the Defense Department in 2006. He has worked as an 
engineer technician for a company in the defense industry since about 2005. His formal 
education includes some college in 2008. His employment history does not include 
military service. His first marriage ended in divorce in 2006. He married his current 
spouse in 2010. He has an adult child from a previous relationship, a minor child from 
his first marriage, and two minor stepchildren from his current marriage. The three minor 
children live with Applicant and his spouse. His spouse is employed outside the home 
as a human-resources manager for a private company.  
  
Applicant has a history of involvement with marijuana going back to the early 
1990s, which he does not dispute. The SOR is concerned about three particular 
incidents in 1992, 1995, and 2017. Each is discussed below. 
 
Applicant was arrested for possession of drug paraphernalia, a marijuana pipe or 
bong, in March 1992. The arrest stemmed from a police investigation of a domestic 
disturbance at the home where Applicant was living at the time. The county attorney 
declined to prosecute the case due to possible problems with the search, resulting in 
insufficient evidence to ensure a reasonable likelihood of conviction.2 
 
Applicant was arrested about three years later in June 1995 for the misdemeanor 
offenses of possession of marijuana and driving on a suspended license.3 At the time, 
                                                          
2 Exhibit A.  
 
3 Exhibit B.  
 
 
3 
 
he was using marijuana once or twice a week.4 His arrest stemmed from a traffic stop 
due to an expired registration. The vehicle was searched and a small amount of 
marijuana in a container was discovered. He subsequently pleaded guilty and the court 
imposed a fine, which he was supposed to pay over time. He failed to make timely 
payment and ended up serving about 40 days in jail in lieu of the fine.5 
 
The third incident occurred on January 1, 2017, when he smoke marijuana (three 
to four puffs off a joint) while attending a New Year’s Day party unaccompanied by his 
spouse.6 He tested positive for marijuana on a random drug screening test on January 
26, 2017. His employer was notified of the positive test on January 31, 2017, and he 
was suspended without pay. He had not reported the marijuana use before the positive 
drug test result. Subsequently, his employer decided that his continued employment 
was contingent upon successful completion of an approved substance-abuse program 
and a negative drug test result. He completed the approved substance-abuse program 
with no further services recommended on March 23, 2017. He had drug testing on 
March 27, 2017, which produced a negative test result, and he returned to work the 
following day under a last-chance agreement with his employer.7 
 
At the hearing, Applicant attributed his January 2017 marijuana use to a lapse in 
good judgment.8 He described the incident as “a weak, stupid moment,” “a stupid move 
on [his] part,” and he deeply regrets it.9 He stated that he had not used marijuana since 
his arrest in 1995.10 He has no intention of using marijuana or any other illegal drug in 
the future. He submitted a signed statement of intent setting forth his intention to abstain 
from all drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.11   
 
In addition to the signed statement of intent, Applicant submitted a number of 
documents in support of his case.12 The documents include highly favorable letters of 
recommendation from two co-workers as well as a letter of reference from the senior 
minister of his church.13 He submitted proof of his attendance at multiple sessions of 
                                                          
4 Tr. 45.  
 
5 Tr. 44-45.  
 
6 Exhibits 2, G, and I; Tr. 37-40.  
 
7 Tr. 57-58.  
 
8 Tr. 47-48.  
 
9 Tr. 39-40.  
 
10 Tr. 45.  
 
11 Exhibit R.  
 
12 Exhibits C – Q.  
 
13 Exhibits C, D, and E.  
 
4 
 
Narcotics Anonymous (NA). And he submitted multiple documents as evidence of his 
good employment record and job-related training.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.14 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.15 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”16 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.17 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.18 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.19 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.20 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.21 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.22 An 
14 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
15 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
16 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
19 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
20 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
22 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
                                                          
 
5 
 
Applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts that have been admitted or proven.23 In addition, an applicant has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.24 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline H for drug involvement and substance misuse, the concern is 
that: 
 
[t]he illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescriptions and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are use in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose, can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. . . .25 
 
 In addition to the above matters, I note that the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued an October 25, 2014 memorandum concerning adherence to federal laws 
prohibiting marijuana use. In doing so, the DNI emphasized three things. First, no state 
can authorize violations of federal law, including violations of the Controlled Substances 
Act, which identifies marijuana as a Schedule I controlled drug. Second, changes to 
state laws (and the laws of the District of Columbia) concerning marijuana use do not 
alter the national security adjudicative guidelines. And third, a person’s disregard of 
federal law concerning the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains relevant 
when making eligibility decisions for sensitive national security positions.  
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) any substance abuse; 
 
AG ¶ 25(b) testing positive for an illegal drug;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia;  
 
AG ¶ 25(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position; 
                                                          
23 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
24 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
25 AG ¶ 24.  
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds of revocation of national security eligibility. 
  
 I have considered the totality of Applicant’s involvement with marijuana, which 
includes two arrests, one conviction resulting in some jail time, and the recent January 
2017 marijuana use while holding a security clearance. Indeed, his January 2017 
marijuana use was about six months after he submitted his June 2016 security 
clearance application. Any illegal drug use is relevant in the context of evaluating a 
person’s security worthiness, but it is particularly egregious if it occurs while granted 
access to classified information. Applicant’s involvement with marijuana during the early 
1990s is easily mitigated as youthful indiscretions that are common among some people 
in their early 20s. The fact that he was granted a security clearance in 2006 bears this 
point out. The same cannot be said for his marijuana use in January 2017 as a working 
engineer technician for a company in the defense industry. More is expected given his 
age and maturity in January 2017. And Applicant should have known better in light of 
his decade of employment with a defense contractor while holding a security clearance 
and being subject to random drug tests.  
 
 Applicant presented a good case in reform and rehabilitation. It is apparent that 
he now understands the seriousness of his January 2017 marijuana use while holding a 
security clearance. Nonetheless, I am not persuaded that he is an acceptable security 
risk. I reached that conclusion for a couple of reasons. First, his January 2017 
marijuana use was clearly forbidden conduct that he chose to engage in despite 
knowing the potential negative consequences. In addition to being a serious lapse in 
good judgment, his marijuana use demonstrated a willingness to engage in high-risk 
behavior, which does not make him a good candidate for a security clearance. Second, 
I doubt Applicant’s January 2017 marijuana use would have come to light but for the 
random drug test. He did not report his January 2017 marijuana use to his employer, 
but instead hoped to avoid detection by having the substance pass through his system 
before the next random drug test. His reluctance to voluntarily self-report such adverse 
information further undermines his suitability for a security clearance.  
    
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have doubts and concerns 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence 
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
 
7 
 
evidence or vice versa. In particular, I considered the fact that Applicant’s employer 
elected to continue his employment after his January 2017 marijuana use. I also 
considered the whole-person concept. I conclude that he has not met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant  
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant  
   Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant26  
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
26 The SOR cross-allegation under Guideline E for personal conduct, which concerns Applicant’s 
questionable judgment, is decided against Applicant under the rationale discussed above under Guideline 
H. Any further discussion under Guideline E is redundant.  
 
