KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline G; Guideline H; Guideline I
DIGEST: In his appeal brief, Applicant describes the Judge’s summary of his clinical history as
“detailed and thorough,” although he claims there are a “few errors” in her findings.  For
example, he challenges the Judge’s statement that he turned down a referral to a “no cost”
rehabilitation program in 2016 by arguing he would have been billed for treatment costs not
covered by insurance and he would have been responsible for “prohibitive” transportation
expenses in getting to and from the distant facility.  From our review of the record, we conclude
that Applicant has not identified any error that is likely to have affected the outcome of the case. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-04028.a1
DATE: 05/08/2019
DATE: May 8, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
)
--------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 17-04028
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
30, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline H (Drug
Involvement and Substance Misuse), Guideline I (Psychological Conditions), and Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  At the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the sole
Guideline F allegation.  Tr. at 12-13.  On February 14, 2019,  after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guidelines H and I
were not raised as an issue on appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The SOR listed nine Guideline G allegations.  One of those allegations had four
subparagraphs and another had two subparagraphs.  In responding to the SOR, Applicant admitted
each of the Guideline G allegations with the exception of denying that he was diagnosed with heroin
abuse disorder in 2009.1  The Judge summarized the case as follows:
Applicant relapsed into abusing alcohol in 2005 after 20 years of abstinence.  He
continued to drink alcohol against medical advice until as recently as July 2017,
despite several inpatient alcohol-detoxification treatments and counseling programs
for diagnosed alcohol abuse disorder, severe.  He is presently committed to
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), but it is too soon to conclude that his maladaptive use
of alcohol will not reoccur.2
  
The Judge found against Applicant on all of the Guideline G allegations.
In his appeal brief, Applicant describes the Judge’s summary of his clinical history as
“detailed and thorough,” although he claims there are a “few errors” in her findings.  Appeal Brief
at 1. For example, he challenges the Judge’s statement that he turned down a referral to a “no cost”
rehabilitation program in 2016 by arguing he would have been billed for treatment costs not covered
by insurance and he would have been responsible for “prohibitive” transportation expenses in getting
to and from the distant facility.  Id.  From our review of the record, we conclude that Applicant has
not identified any error that is likely to have affected the outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 12-00678 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014)(an error is harmless if it did not likely effect the overall
outcome of the case.).
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence.  Examples of these arguments include his claim the Judge mis-characterized his
current AA participation as comparable to his participation in earlier years, his contention that he
1 Under Guideline G, SOR ¶ 1.a alleged, “In May 2009, you were admitted to [hospital name omitted] for
alcohol detoxification.  You were diagnosed with alcohol abuse disorder and heroin abuse disorder.”  
2 Decision at 1.  
2
has “attained 20 months of sobriety without any alcohol or other mind-altering substance use[,]”3 and
his assertion that his earlier relapses were based on chronic medical and other issues that have been
changed or eliminated.   On the other hand, “[i]n October 2017, Applicant was evaluated by a duly-
qualified licensed clinical psychologist, who opined that Applicant’s alcohol abuse disorder, severe
(in early remission) is a condition that would negatively impact his reliability, judgment, stability,
and trustworthiness.”4  As the trier of fact, the Judge had to weigh the evidence as a whole and
decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 15-08684 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 27, 2017).       
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor 
of the national security.”
3 Appeal Brief at 3.  
4 Decision at 15.  
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
