1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 17-02244 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
May 21, 2019 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has approximately $31,000 in past-due debts that he cannot, or will not, 
resolve. His drug use has been mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, 
and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 28, 2016. (Government Exhibit 1.) On July 25, 2017, the Department 
of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and H (Drug Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
2 
 
 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position, effective within the 
Department of Defense on or after June 8, 2017.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 14, 2017, with 
attachments and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 22, 2017. The case was assigned to me 
on January 4, 2018. Due to a family medical emergency the case was reassigned to 
another administrative judge on January 25, 2018. The case was reassigned to me on 
March 20, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice 
of Hearing on March 20, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 3, 2018. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits A, B, D, 
E, H, K, L, and M. There are no Applicant Exhibits C, F, G, I, or J. Applicant’s exhibits 
were also admitted without objection. Applicant requested the record remain open for 
submission of additional exhibits. He submitted Applicant Exhibits N and O, which were 
also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 
11, 2018.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old software engineer. He is married to his second wife, and 
has a Bachelor of Science degree. He is seeking to obtain national security eligibility for 
a security clearance in connection with his work with the DoD.  
 
Applicant has severe physical issues that have resulted in periods where he 
received disability while recovering. He was basically unemployed between 2005 and 
2011 due to his physical issues. During that time he attended college. Applicant worked 
full time from 2013 to 2015, when he again went on disability. He was unemployed for 
about a year before obtaining work with his current employer in October 2016. He 
returned to disability in August 2017, and was on disability at the time of the hearing. He 
returned to work in June 2018. When on disability Applicant makes about 60% of his 
salary. Applicant contends his physical problems have caused the majority of his financial 
issues. (Government Exhibits 1 at Section 26, and 2; Applicant Exhibits L and N; Tr. 17-
19, 26, 31-32, 35-36, 64-66.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F – Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has a history of past-due indebtedness that can raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations set forth in the SOR with the exception of 
subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, and 1.x.1 The total amount of money Applicant is alleged to 
owe is approximately $31,000. The existence and amount of the debts is documented by 
credit reports dated March 24, 2017; and March 15, 2018. (Government Exhibits 4 and 
5.) (See Government Exhibit 1 at Section 26.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004. The debts included 
an automobile loan, medical bills, and student loans. Applicant received a discharge in 
bankruptcy on February 14, 2005. Given the length of time since Applicant filed this 
bankruptcy, I find that it has no current security significance and this allegation is found 
for Applicant. (Government Exhibit 3; Tr. 19, 30-31.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant denied he was indebted for past-due child support in the amount of 
$5,369. Applicant submitted documentation showing that he had paid all the past-due 
child support and a lien filed by the county had been lifted. In addition, the credit reports 
show that Applicant’s payments were timely and that he paid as agreed. This debt is 
resolved. (Answer; Government Exhibits 4 and 5; Applicant Exhibits B and D; Tr. 19-20, 
34, 65-66.)  
 
 1.c. Applicant denied that he owed a creditor $3,680 for a judgment from 2013. 
Attached to Applicant’s Answer is a letter from the creditor, Applicant’s landlord, stating 
that Applicant paid the balance that was due on this judgment. This debt is resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibit H; Tr. 20-21, 36.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $25. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $834. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
  1.f. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $380. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
  1.g. Applicant denied owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $1,818, 
stating he had no knowledge of the account. Applicant admitted that it was his debt at the 
hearing, and that he has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has 
no current plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-
34, 40, 66.) 
 
                                                 
1 In Applicant’s Answer he denied subparagraph 1.w. This was in error. He admitted 1.w and denied 1.x. 
The original Answer has been annotated to reflect this change. (Tr. 37-38.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $105. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 38, 51, 66.) 
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $120. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $18. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $43. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
 1.l. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $190. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.m. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $522. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.n. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $608. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.o. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $305. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.p. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $960. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.q. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $235. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
 1.r. Applicant admitted owing this past-due automobile loan debt in the amount of 
$10,005. Applicant submitted documentation showing that the creditor is garnishing 
Applicant’s pay during the time he is working to pay the debt. This debt is being resolved 
through garnishment. (Applicant Exhibits E and O; Tr. 21-22, 39.) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 1.s. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $827. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.t. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $3,264. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
 1.u. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $400. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.v. Applicant admitted owing a past-due commercial debt in the amount of $150. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 66.) 
 
 1.w. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $254. 
Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current 
plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 32-34, 66.) 
 
 1.x. Applicant denied owing a past-due debt for school tuition for his daughter in 
the amount of $839. Applicant admitted this debt at the hearing, but also said that he has 
not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, and has no current plans to pay 
this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 23, 37-38, 40-41.) 
 
 1.y. Applicant admitted owing a past-due debt for a delinquent library book in the 
amount of $58. Applicant has not made any payments on this past-due indebtedness, 
and has no current plans to pay this past-due indebtedness. This debt is not resolved. 
(Tr. 23, 40, 66.) 
 
 Applicant had not received any kind of financial counseling to help him prepare a 
budget or otherwise help him resolve his debts. He did not have a plan to resolve his 
debts, and until he returned to work full time he did not intend to prepare one. (Tr. 45, 66.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has used illegal drugs. Applicant admitted all three allegations under this 
paragraph.  
 
 2.a and 2.b. Applicant purchased marijuana once, and used it several times during 
a single month in 2013. At that time Applicant was in severe pain from his knee and back, 
and prescription painkillers were not working for him. He used marijuana between two 
and four times during that period. The marijuana did nothing for his pain, so he stopped 
 
 
6 
 
 
using it. (Government Exhibits 1 at Section 23, and 2; Applicant Exhibit K; Tr. 24-25, 52-
58.) 
 
 2.c. Applicant began having seizures in 2015. He did research that indicated 
ingesting marijuana or pills that contained tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active 
ingredient in marijuana, would possibly help stop the seizures. At that time he consumed 
several THC pills that were prescribed for someone else. The pills were unsuccessful in 
stopping his seizures, so he stopped using them. (Government Exhibits 1 at Section 23, 
and 2; Applicant Exhibit K; Tr. 25, 58-62.) 
 
 Applicant had not used illegal drugs since 2015 and has no intention of using illegal 
drugs in the future. As of the date of the hearing he was not taking any pain medication, 
or other medication. (Tr. 60-63.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F – Financial Considerations)  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant, based on the evidence, had 24 delinquent accounts that he could not or 
chose not to resolve. These debts have been in existence for a considerable period of 
time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence does not establish that any of the above mitigating conditions apply 
to Applicant’s case, with several exceptions. As stated, subparagraphs 1.a, b, c, and r are 
found for Applicant. With regard to AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant has had a long history of medical 
ailments that have obviously affected his finances in a detrimental way. However, there 
is little evidence that Applicant has acted responsibly to try and resolve his debts. He still 
owes a considerable amount of money, and has no plan about how to pay it off. Applicant 
did not even pay the smallest debts, for $18 and $25. He failed to submit evidence that 
would tend to support any of the other mitigating conditions. There is no basis for me to 
find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation. 
Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The security concern relating to Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse is set 
forth in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
 
 
9 
 
 
defined in 21 U.S.C. §802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted 
in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.  
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of 
drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Applicant purchased and used marijuana for a brief time in 2013. He used THC 
pills for a brief time in 2015. Both of the stated disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 have also been considered: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug-involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant has had severe pain issues, and a history of seizures. The drug use was 
a misguided attempt by him to resolve those medical issues after other treatment had 
failed. The use of marijuana and THC pills was unsuccessful, Applicant realized it and 
stopped the conduct, and credibly stated he would not use illegal drugs again in the future. 
Applicant has mitigated the security significance of his past drug use. Paragraph 2 is 
found for Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concern caused by his significant financial difficulties. Overall, the record 
evidence does create substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present suitability for national 
security eligibility and a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.l:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.w:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.x:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.y:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
   
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
