1 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-01969 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government:  Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
05/07/2019
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
Curry, Marc, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns generated by his 
family members who are residents of the West Bank. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position, effective June 8, 2017. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DOD adjudicators 
could not make the affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. It recommended 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On January 22, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, admitting all of the 
allegations, and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 16, 
2019. On February 13, 2019, DOHA issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the case for 
March 7, 2019. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel submitted two documents for admission that I marked as Government Exhibits 
(GEs) 1 and 2. Applicant submitted 13 exhibits, incorporated into the record as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through O. 
 
I took administrative notice, at Department Counsel’s request, of the facts 
encapsulated within seven source documents, identified as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I 
through HE VII. Also, I incorporated Department Counsel’s corresponding memo and 
Department Counsel’s discovery letter to Applicant, as HE VIII and HE IX, respectively. 
The transcript was received on February 26, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old married man with a 13-year-old daughter. He was born 
and raised in the West Bank, which was then part of Jordan, and is now governed by 
the Palestinian Authority. He earned a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree in the 
field of electrical engineering from a foreign university before immigrating to the United 
States to pursue a doctorate. (Tr. 71) He successfully obtained the doctorate in 1993. 
(Tr. 71) He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1997. (GE 2 at 1) 
 
 Applicant is a research physicist and a university professor. He is highly 
respected in his field. According to his current supervisor, he is an outstanding scientist. 
(Tr. 35) His previous supervisor characterized him as a tremendously talented, yet 
humble individual who puts the accomplishments of his subordinates ahead of his own. 
(Tr. 26) According to a friend and former fellow Ph.D candidate whom Applicant met in 
1992, Applicant is “very dependable, [and] very reliable.” (Tr. 45) In 2017, Applicant’s 
university granted him the “Excellence in Teaching Award” for his “Excellence in 
Instruction and Dedication.” (AE J) 
 
 Applicant’s wife immigrated to the United States from Jordan with her family in 
1976 when she was three years old. (Tr. 72) She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
1984. (AE A) Applicant’s daughter is a natural-born U.S. citizen. 
  
 Applicant’s father is deceased. Applicant’s mother, a homemaker, is a Jordanian 
citizen and resident of the West Bank. Applicant travels to the West Bank approximately 
every other year to visit her, staying three to four weeks per visit. (Tr. 81)  He also 
financially supports her by sending $1,200 monthly. (Tr. 87) He feels a moral obligation 
to support his mother. (Tr. 86) 
 
 Applicant has three brothers (B1, B2, B3) and three sisters (S1, S2, S3) who are 
Jordanian citizens and residents of the West Bank. B1 is a teacher. (GE 2 at 4) His wife, 
Applicant’s sister-in-law, is the principal at the school where he teachers.  
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 B2 is a plumber. (Tr. 94) His marital status is unknown from the record. B3 is a 
sanitation technician, and his wife is a homemaker. (Tr. 94) S1 is a homemaker, married 
to a doctor. They are U.S. citizens who lived in the United States before returning to the 
West Bank to care for S1’s elderly parents in-law. (Tr. 94) S2 is a teacher. Her husband 
is an electrical engineer. (Tr. 96-97) S2 has dual U.S. citizenship and has spent part of 
her life living in the United States. S3 is a homemaker. Her husband is a shopkeeper. 
(Tr. 98). 
 
 Applicant speaks with his siblings twice per year on religious holidays. (Tr. 89) 
They exchange monetary gifts on holidays. Applicant sees them on his trips to the West 
Bank when he visits his mother.  
 
Applicant owns no property in the West Bank. He has $13,000 deposited in a 
checking account, and $1.1 million deposited in two saving accounts in the United 
States. (AE N) 
 
Applicant is a philanthropist who gives thousands of dollars annually to charities 
and other non-profit entities. (AE F – AE H) He is a respected elder at his place of 
worship who actively participates in interfaith organizations dedicated to promoting 
religious tolerance. The spiritual leader of his place of worship testified that he would 
trust Applicant with his wife, his children, and his life. (Tr. 63) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The West Bank refers to the region on the west bank of the Jordan River that 
was occupied and administered by Jordan after 1948 before coming under Israeli 
control after the Six-Day War in 1967. (HE II at 1) Control of the West Bank is divided, 
per a 1994 agreement, between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. (HE II at 1) In 
2007, Hamas, a U.S.-designated terror organization, violently took over the Gaza Strip, 
part of the territory of the West Bank that the Palestinian Authority had governed.  
 
The U.S. State Department advises against travel to the West Bank because of 
the risk of terrorism, civil unrest, and the potential for armed conflict. (Item III at 1) 
Multiple terrorist groups are present in the West Bank. (HE IV at 2) The Palestinian 
authority continues to provide “martyr payments” to the families of Palestinian 
individuals killed carrying out terrorist acts. (HE V at 3) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance.” (AG ¶ 6) The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a 
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
 The West Bank has a significant problem with terrorism. The potential for civil 
unrest is pervasive. Consequently, Applicant’s contacts with relatives who live there 
trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b).  
 
 Applicant has been living in the United States for more than 25 years. In that 
time, he has earned a Ph.D, started a family, and saved more than $1 million. He is a 
pillar of his community, and a highly-respected scientist. Given the financial, familial, 
community, and professional roots that he has cultivated during the 27 years he has 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
lived in the United States, I conclude that he would resolve any conflict, generated by 
his relatives residing in the West Bank, in the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b), “there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest,” applies. Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security 
concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 In reaching this decision, I was particularly cognizant of Applicant’s stellar 
employment and character references. 
 
Formal Finding 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:     For Applicant 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Marc Curry 
Administrative Judge 
