 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-01420 
      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se    
 
 
05/08/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for 
access to classified information. A Chinese citizen by birth and a U.S. citizen since 
2000, Applicant met her burden to present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern for foreign influence based on her family ties 
to China. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on February 25, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. After a background investigation, on July 14, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1.  
 
 
2 
 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence due to her 
family ties to China, the country of her birth.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 2, 2017. She admitted the SOR 
allegations with explanations. She also requested an in-person hearing before an 
administrative judge.   
 
The case was assigned to me on December 13, 2017. The hearing took place as 
scheduled on April 18, 2018. Both Department Counsel and Applicant offered 
documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Government Exhibits 1-4 and Applicant’s 
Exhibits A-G. I took administrative or official notice, which is similar to judicial notice, of 
certain facts concerning the country of China per Department Counsel’s written 
request.2 The essential facts about China are discussed below. The hearing transcript 
was received on May 3, 2018.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, a native of China, is a 56-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a 
security clearance at the secret level, which was granted to her in 2006,3 for her job as 
a software quality engineer. She has worked for the same aerospace company since 
2004. Before that, she worked as a software engineer for a large U.S. company. She 
has a good employment record based on a highly favorable letter of recommendation 
from a technical fellow who serves as the technical lead for a team of 200 engineers.4 
Among other things, the letter described Applicant as a sought after software engineer 
“due to her dedication, attention to detail, and hard work.” The letter also described 
Applicant as “a dedicated American citizen who enjoys being active in the community 
and just wants the best for her [children].”  
 
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree from a Chinese university of science and 
technology in 1983. She was then employed as a software and hardware engineer. She 
lived with her parents until her marriage to a citizen of China in 1987. Applicant has 
lived in the United States since 1990, when she and her then husband came here via 
her husband’s student visa so he could pursue further education. In due course, she 
became a permanent resident of the United States, and she obtained U.S. citizenship in 
2000. Her marriage ended in divorce in 2004. She had two children during the marriage, 
both of whom are native-born U.S. citizens. Her 23-year-old daughter is a recent college 
graduate who has plans to attend medical school. Her 19-year-old son is a college 
student who studies computer science.  
 
 
                                                          
2 Exhibit 4.  
 
3 Exhibit 1; Tr. 6-7.  
 
4 Exhibit B.  
 
 
3 
 
The SOR concerns Applicant’s family ties to China via her father, mother, and 
two sisters. These are the same family members as when Applicant was granted a 
security clearance in 2006. The relevant details are set forth below. 
 
Applicant’s mother and father, now both in their 80s, came to the United States in 
2002 via Applicant’s sponsorship. They were granted permanent resident status in 
November 2002.5 They lived with Applicant when they were not visiting their other 
daughter in the United States. Neither speaks English, and neither was employed in the 
United States. It was not unusual for her parents to travel back and forth between the 
United States and China. They returned to China in 2012 or 2013 due to her father’s 
declining health.6 Applicant’s father has been retired for more than 20 years from his job 
as a manager for the same company she worked for in China.7 Likewise, Applicant’s 
mother has been retired for more than 20 years from her job as a department-store 
manager.8 Applicant speaks to her parents by telephone weekly. Applicant’s parents are 
aware that she works as a software engineer for an aerospace company, but that is the 
extent of their knowledge.9 
 
In addition to her parents, Applicant has two sisters who are both citizens of 
China. One sister lives in the United States and has been a permanent resident since 
2011.10 Her sister has a job working in a college library. Her sister’s husband is 
employed as a professor at the same college. Another sister lives in China, and she is 
employed as a civil engineer for a Chinese engineering firm.   
 
Applicant’s financial interests are here with the exception of a bank account in 
China. In addition to her annual salary, Applicant has the following financial assets in 
the United States: (1) her home with a market value of about $400,000 with a mortgage 
loan balance of about $100,000; (2) a 401(k) account with a balance of about $700,000 
to $800,000; (3) two residential rental properties which are unencumbered by mortgage 
loans; (4) approximately $250,000 in IRA accounts; and (5) $75,000 to $100,000 in 
bank accounts.11 She opened a bank account in China sometime after her parents 
return in the event she wanted to provide financial assistance to them.12 She made an 
initial deposit of about $25,000 to $30,000, and has since made no further deposits. The 
                                                          
5 Exhibits D and E.  
 
6 Tr. 51.  
 
7 Tr. 47.  
 
8 Tr. 48.  
 
9 Tr. 53-54.  
 
10 Exhibit F.  
 
11 Tr. 62-69.  
 
12 Tr. 57-59.  
 
 
4 
 
account is in her name, but her parents have a debit or ATM card to access the account 
if necessary.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has been accused of or cited for a security 
infraction or security violation since granted eligibility in 2006. Likewise, there is no 
evidence that she has otherwise mishandled sensitive or classified information or failed 
to perform security-related duties or responsibilities. At the hearing, she expressed a 
good understanding of security-related matters.13  
 
Concerning the country of China, Department Counsel’s request for 
administrative notice contains an extensive discussion of the security concerns 
associated with China. The most pertinent of those facts are the following: (1) China is 
an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party is the paramount authority; 
(2) China (along with Russia) is the most aggressive collector of intelligence (both 
industrial and military) related to U.S. information and technology; and (3) China has a 
poor record of human rights regarding respect for the integrity of the person, respect for 
civil liberties, respect for political rights, corruption and lack of transparency in 
government, worker rights, as well as discrimination, societal abuses, and human 
trafficking. The maltreatment and oppression of the people in Tibet is but one example 
of China’s poor human-rights record.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.14 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.15 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”16 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.17 The Appeal Board has 
                                                          
13 Tr. 56-57.  
 
14 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
15 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
16 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
5 
 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.18 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.19 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.20 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.21 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.22 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.23 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.24 
 
Discussion 
 
 The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B for foreign influence is whether 
Applicant’s ties to China should disqualify her from access to classified information. 
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,25 the suitability of an applicant may be 
questioned or put into doubt due to foreign contacts and interests. The overall concern 
under the guideline is: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
19 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
20 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
22 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
23 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
24 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
25 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).  
 
 
6 
 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.26 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise a security concern under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology.  
 
 The starting point for the analysis is the country of China. Suffice it to say, the 
U.S. Government views the behavior of the Chinese government as presenting a 
serious national security concern, and the heightened-risk element is satisfied too. 
Given Applicant’s family ties to China, the Government has established its case under 
Guideline B. The above disqualifying conditions are raised by the evidence.  
 
 The guideline provides that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate foreign 
influence concerns. Given the evidence here, I considered the following mitigating 
conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
                                                          
26 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
7 
 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.  
 
 China’s relationship with the United States and the heightened risk it presents 
place a heavy burden on Applicant to mitigate the security concern. With that said, 
Applicant has multiple indicators of a mature, stable, responsible, and trustworthy 
person. She was serious, candid, and credible at the hearing. She appears to have 
cooperated fully and provided truthful information about her family ties to China during 
the security clearance process. She made a good impression upon me during the 
hearing.  
 
 I have considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to China. Applicant came to the 
United States more than 25 years ago in 1990, and she has since established and 
made her life here. She has a long employment record in the United States, she gave 
birth to two children in the United States, and her adult children are pursing their lives 
and educations in the United States. In addition to her children, she has a sister who 
lives and works in the United States as well as a brother-in-law. Her parents resided in 
the United States for about a decade until returning to China for health reasons in about 
2012 or 2013. Her financial assets, which are substantial, are in the United States 
except for a bank account in China she established to assist her parents. The value and 
routine nature of her Chinese bank account is such that it is unlikely to pose a conflict, 
and it is unlikely to be used to influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) is 
applicable. 
 
 Other than her parents return to China, little has changed since Applicant was 
favorably adjudicated for a security clearance in 2006. Applicant has since had more 
time to establish her ties and connections to the United States, and to demonstrate that 
she adheres to security rules and requirements for her employment with a defense 
contractor. Given the totality of facts and circumstances, I conclude that it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
United States and the interests of the Chinese government or her family members who 
have Chinese citizenship. I further conclude there is no conflict of interest, because 
Applicant has developed such deep and long-standing relationships and loyalties in the 
United States that she can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in the 
favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
  
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighted the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. 
Accordingly, I conclude that she met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
