 
1 
 
 
                             
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
     
      
 
                               
 
  
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02083 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jawid Fatih, Personal Representative 
05/28/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 4, 2019. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 1, 2019. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on April 19, 2019. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. There were no 
2 
objections to any of the exhibits offered, and they were admitted into evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on April 30, 2019.  
Request for Administrative Notice 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications.1 The facts are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
Findings of Fact 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
Applicant is 63 years old. He was born in Afghanistan. He married in 1976. His 
wife passed away in 2001. He has eight children. All of them were born in Afghanistan. 
He earned a bachelor’s degree in Afghanistan. He served in the Afghan National Army 
from 1974 to 1997. He was a Major. In 1997, he abandoned his Army commitment and 
fled the country with his family, because the Taliban invaded the area where he worked, 
and he was concerned for their safety. He moved his family to Turkmenistan in 1998, 
where they lived until 2005. He and his family were granted refugee visas and moved to 
the United States. His eldest daughter was married at the time and moved back to 
Afghanistan with her husband, who is a linguist for the government of Turkey. She is a 
homemaker. She and her husband are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. They have 
six children. Applicant visited his daughter in 2015 and talks on the phone with her 
frequently. Applicant’s seven children, who immigrated to the United States with him, are 
all citizens and residents of the United States. Three children are married. Their spouses 
are from Afghanistan and permanent residents of the United States. He has six 
grandchildren in the United States.2  
Applicant became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 2014. From 2005 to 
2010, he worked as a linguist and cultural advisor in the United States for different 
contractors. From January 2010 to June 2014, Applicant worked as a linguist for a federal 
contractor in Afghanistan. He was then an on-call temporary linguist and advisor from 
June 2014 until he was hired again full time in June 2017 as a linguist working in 
Afghanistan until the present.3  
1 Source documents are attached to Hearing Exhibit I. 
2 Tr. 12, 21-30, 40-53, 66-68; GE 2. 
3 Tr. 30-33. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s brother and two sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Applicant did not see his brother from 1997 until 2015. He occasionally contacted him by 
telephone. His brother is married and has eight children. Applicant is “friends” with some 
of them on Facebook and will occasionally “like” their posts. His brother works for the 
Afghan government. Applicant also visited his two sisters in 2015. Both sisters are 
married and are homemakers. One sister’s husband is a custodian. The other sister’s 
husband is a retired custodian. He is not in regular contact with them. He does not discuss 
his job with them.4  
 
 Applicant does not own property or have any assets in Afghanistan. He owns a car 
in the United States. He helped his family purchase a house in March 2010, by giving 
them $32,000. Two of his children and their families live in the house. Applicant lives there 
when he is in the United States. Applicant has approximately $100,000 in his bank 
accounts in the United States. He does not provide any financial support to anyone in 
Afghanistan.5 
 
 Applicant explained that when he is in Afghanistan he lives on the U.S. military 
base. He is not permitted to leave the base due to safety concerns. He was involved in 
patrols outside of the base for a few months. He understands the danger of serving with 
the American forces. He testified that he has spent many years working with the United 
States military and is happy with his job. He considers himself a loyal American and would 
never engage in any activity that would compromise himself or the United States.6 
 
 Applicant provided certificates of appreciation from United States and NATO forces 
for his unwavering commitment in support of their missions and his outstanding 
performance and professionalism that contributed to their success. He also provided 
character letters noting his past contributions as a role player and linguist.7 
 
Afghanistan8 
 
 The United States Department of State’s travel warning for Afghanistan remains in 
effect and it warns U.S. citizens against travel there because of continued instability and 
threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel there is unsafe due to 
ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, and armed rivalry 
between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, suicide bombings, and insurgent 
attacks. These attacks may also target Afghan and U.S. Government convoys and 
compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas.  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 34-40, 50-52, 54. 
 
5 Tr. 54, 58-62. 
 
6 Tr. 70-72; GE 2.  
 
7 AE A. 
 
8 HE I. 
 
4 
 
 
As recently as December 2018, The U.S. Embassy in Kabul warned U.S. citizens 
in Afghanistan of reports that militants plan to conduct attacks against hotels, compounds, 
international organizations, universities, airports and other locations frequented by U.S. 
citizens and other foreign nationals.  
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State in Iraq and 
Syria (ISIS), and members of other armed opposition groups are active throughout the 
country. These terrorist groups routinely attack Afghan, coalition forces, and U.S. targets 
with little regard for or the express intent to cause civilian casualties. Due to security 
concerns, unofficial travel to Afghanistan by U.S. Government employees and their family 
members is restricted and requires prior approval from the State Department.  
 
Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by 
different terrorist groups. These groups remain active and were able to conduct a number 
of high-profile, mass-casualty attacks in Kabul against sectarian and Afghan government 
targets. They continue to plan such attacks against U.S. and coalition forces and Afghan 
interests. Border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan remain safe havens for terrorists. 
The Afghan government struggles to assert control over this remote region.  
 
According to a June 2017 U.S. Department of Defense report on Afghanistan, 
Afghanistan faces a continuing threat from as many as 20 insurgent and terrorist networks 
present and operating in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region, in what is the highest 
concentration of extremist and terrorist groups in the world. 
 
 The State Department’s report on human rights for Afghanistan notes there was 
widespread violence, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians and killings of persons 
affiliated with the government by armed insurgent groups, widespread disregard for the 
rule of law and little accountability for those who committed human rights abuses. There 
was also targeted violence and endemic societal discrimination against women and girls.  
 
 Afghanistan remains an important partner of the United States in the fight against 
terrorism, working with the U.S. to eliminate terrorist groups. The U.S. Government 
continues to invest resources to help Afghanistan improve its security, governance, 
institutions, and economy. The U.S. Government has a strong bilateral partnership with 
the Afghan government. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
 
6 
 
 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Applicant has a daughter, son-in-law, brother, and two sisters and their spouses 
who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His brother works for the Afghan 
government. Applicant has ties of affection to them. He has infrequent contact with his 
brother and sisters, but has frequent contact with his daughter. Applicant’s family residing 
in Afghanistan creates a heightened risk and a potential foreign influence concern.  
 
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to 
Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against 
U.S. citizens. It also has serious concerns about terrorist activities in Afghanistan that 
specifically target Americans. There are widely documented safety issues for residents of 
Afghanistan because of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has supported the U.S. 
Government through his work as a cultural advisor and linguist and is willing to do so in 
the future. Numerous linguists, translators and advisors supporting U.S. forces, have 
family living in Afghanistan. Thousands of the U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian 
contractors serving in Afghanistan are targets of terrorists along with Afghan civilians who 
support the Afghan Government and cooperate with coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
 
7 
 
 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United 
States, and the situation in Afghanistan place a significant, but not insurmountable burden 
of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members 
living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a 
position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a 
desire to assist a relative living in Afghanistan.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationships with relatives living in Afghanistan create 
a potential conflict of interest because terrorists could place pressure on his family living 
there in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified information. These 
relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” under AG ¶ 7(a). Substantial evidence was produced of Applicant’s contacts 
with family in Afghanistan and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
Applicant was a major in the Afghan military from 1974 to approximately December 
1997. I do not find any disqualifying conditions are raised by his service and find in his 
favor concerning this allegation. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s daughter, son-in-law, siblings and their spouses are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. He has infrequent contact with his siblings and their spouses, 
but not casual. It is unknown how much contact he has with his son-in-law. He has 
frequent and more than casual contact with his daughter. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has served and supported 
U.S. forces from 2005 to the present, serving both in the United States and in Afghanistan. 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen, bought a home, and has considerable financial interests 
in the United States. Seven of his eight children are citizens and residents of the United 
States. He fled Afghanistan and came to the United States as a refugee.  
 
Applicant’s years of support to the United States military in Afghanistan as a 
linguist, including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily towards mitigating 
security concerns. Applicant is currently serving as a linguist in support of the U.S. armed 
forces. He continues to support the United States’ goals in Afghanistan. He has 
expressed his loyalty and commitment to the United States. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and resident of Afghanistan. Like every other resident of Afghanistan, any of his relatives 
who may be living in Afghanistan are at risk from terrorists. 
 
Applicant’s brother works for the Afghan government. His son-in-law works for 
Turkish forces. I have considered these contacts. It is important to be mindful of the United 
States’ huge investment of manpower and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant has 
supported U.S. goals and objectives there. Applicant and his relatives living in 
Afghanistan are potential targets of terrorists, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add risk to his relatives living in Afghanistan from 
lawless elements in Afghanistan.  
 
Applicant’s possible future connections to his relatives living in Afghanistan are 
less significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of 
the U.S. Government, financial interests and bonds to the United States, performance as 
a linguist to U.S. forces, seven children who are U.S. citizens and residents, and his own 
U.S. citizenship are important factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. 
He has no assets in Afghanistan, and he has significant financial interests in the United 
States. Based on Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationship and loyalty to the United 
States, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant serves as a linguist for a federal contractor and has actively supported 
the U.S. military mission in Afghanistan for 14 years. He understands the risks associated 
with having family in Afghanistan. Based on Applicant’s past commitment and service and 
his continued loyalty to the United States, he has mitigated the foreign influence security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
