 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 
  
 
 
) 
)       ISCR Case No: 18-01734  
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
05/31/2019 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns, resulting 
from unpaid child support and delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 10, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AG), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.   
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2018, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
On February 5, 2019, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by him on March 12, 2019. The FORM notified Applicant 
that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response 
to the FORM or object to the Government’s Items. Hence, Items 1 through 7 are admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned this case to me on May 29, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed a portion of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and 
denied the remaining amount. He admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e. 
He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and unmarried. He has a 24-year-old son from a previous 
relationship. He began his current job with a defense contractor in January 2018. Prior to 
that he had worked for another defense contractor since April 2017. (Items 4, 5) 
 
 In December 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In 
it, he disclosed numerous periods of unemployment: August 2008 through April 2013; 
November 2013 to March 2014; July 2014 to October 2014; December 2014 to November 
2015; January 2016 to March 2016; and September 2016 to April 2017. (Item 4) 
  
 During an April 2018 interview with an investigator, Applicant discussed his periods 
of unemployment. He indicated that after he was laid off from a position in August 2008, 
he stopped working for several years and traveled around this country on his motorcycle 
with his girlfriend. He initially used unemployment benefits to support himself during those 
years, and was subsequently supported by his girlfriend. He also discussed other periods 
of unemployment and his delinquent debts. (Item 5 at 2-6) 
 
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) from January 2018, the SOR alleged eight 
debts that totaled $52,588. They included unpaid child support arrears totaling $42,542.1 
The other seven debts became delinquent between 2015 and 2017, and include unpaid 
credit cards and medical bills. (Items 6, 7) 
 
 In his November 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that he did not owe the entire 
$42,542 child support arrears alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but only $12,901. He said the 
remaining amount is assessed interest (SOR ¶ 1.a). He indicated this debt became 
delinquent while he was unemployed. He made no mention of when he would resolve the 
debt. He stated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e also arose when he was 
unemployed. He said he intended to resolve them. (Item 3) He denied owing the medical 
                                                 
1 Applicant’s son reached his majority in 2012, so Applicant is no longer responsible for child support. The 
record is unclear as to what period of time that the alleged arrears covers. (Item 5) 
 
 
3 
 
 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h because he said he had insurance which he used 
to cover the medical bills.  
 
 Applicant did not submit evidence that he paid, resolved, or is resolving any of the 
alleged debts. He did not produce evidence that he is formally disputing them. He did not 
provide evidence that he participated in financial or credit counseling. He did not provide 
a budget or other information related to his financial obligations from which to determine 
his current financial reliability. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
4 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of being unable to meet financial obligations, which began 
before 2015 and continues to date. The evidence raises security concerns under the 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies are ongoing and continue to cast doubt on his 
judgment and reliability. Although he stated he experienced periods of unemployment, 
some of which may have been beyond his control, he acknowledged that after being laid 
off in August 2008, he decided to travel for years rather than work, which was a decision 
within his control. He has been fully employed since August 2017. There is no evidence 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has not participated credit 
counseling or demonstrated a clear indication that the eight alleged debts are under 
control. He has not established repayment plans with any creditors, including the state 
that manages his child support payments. He disputes the total amount of the child 
support arrears, but did not provide proof to substantiate his dispute or evidence of actions 
he has taken to resolve it. He did not provide sufficient evidence to establish the above 
mitigating conditions.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including those discussed in the 
analysis of the financial considerations guideline. Applicant is a mature individual, who is 
aware of the Government’s security concerns. He was informed after receipt of the FORM 
that the evidence he submitted in response to the SOR was insufficient to mitigate the 
allegations. Despite that notice, he did not provide additional proof of actions he has taken 
to resolve the delinquent debts. Overall, the absence of evidence creates sufficient doubt 
as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:       Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
