     
     
     
           
_____________
    
  
     
     
     
  
  
     
   
 
    
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) 
 
 
) 
---------------------------------        )   ISCR  Case No.  18-01870
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance 
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
 For Applicant: Pro se
05/08/2019 
 Decision
  ______________ 
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge: 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of Case 
On August 17, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons 
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a 
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Adjudicative 
Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017. 
   
     
      
     
  
    
    
   
      
 
     
  
  
      
  
    
    
   
     
   
    
  
  
  
   
  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 7, 2019, and elected to have his case 
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on February 12, 2019, and interposed no objections to the materials in 
the FORM. Applicant timely supplemented the FORM with a February 2019 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy discharge. Applicant’s post-FORM submission was received without 
objections and admitted as Item 7. The case was assigned to me on April 24, 2019.
Summary of Pleadings 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to pay his federal income taxes for 
tax years 2000-2004 and 2007; (b) failed to file and pay his federal income taxes as 
required 2014-2015; (c) Is indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes in 
the approximate amount of $28,000; (d) is indebted to the Federal Government for a tax 
lien entered against him in May 2015 for $4,728; and (e) accumulated ten delinquent 
debts exceeding $17,000. Allegedly, these federal taxes owed and delinquent debts 
remain unresolved and outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the alleged debts with 
explanations. He claimed that for several years he was financially unstable. Further, he 
claimed that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in December 2018 and included 
all of the listed SOR debts in his bankruptcy petition. 
Findings of Fact 
Applicant is a 58-year-old electronics technician for a defense contractor who 
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by 
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional 
findings follow. 
Background 
Applicant married his first spouse in September 1979, and divorced in June 1993. 
(Item 2) He remarried in April 1997 and divorced her in June 1998. He has no children 
from either marriage. Applicant attended college classes between January 1985 and 
September 1997 and earned an associate’s degree. (Item 2) He reported no military 
service. 
Since April 2016, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (Items 2-3) 
Previously, he worked for other employers in various types of positions. (Items 2-3) He 
reported unemployment between January 2014 and August 2015. (Items 2-3) 
Applicant’s finances 
Records confirm that Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2000-2004, 2007, and 2014. (Items 3-6) Reportedly, he accrued aggregate 
delinquent taxes exceeding $44,000 for these years. To date, he has not provided any 
documentation of filing his federal returns or making payments on his owed federal taxes 
2 
  
       
   
     
    
      
      
  
 
 
     
    
 
   
 
     
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
 
    
      
   
  
   
     
for these years. In March 2013, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a federal tax lien 
against Applicant in the amount of $12,630. The lien does not specify what years the lien 
covers. (Item 4) Asked about this 2013 tax lien in his personal subject interview (PSI) with 
an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in January 2018, Applicant 
expressed his belief that the total amount of taxes he owed for tax years 2000-2004 and 
2007 approximated $28,000, but could not be sure. (Item 3) His estimate bears some 
approximation to the sum covered by the 2013 federal tax lien and may possibly 
represent an over-estimate of taxes owed for these tax years. Without more information 
from Applicant, though, no firm inferences can be drawn. Taxes covered by the 2013 tax 
lien and any additional taxes owed for these years that make up Applicant’s $28,000 
estimate have neither been paid nor otherwise resolved or reconciled to date. 
In May 2015, the IRS entered a second tax lien to cover calculated taxes owed for 
tax years 20l4 and 2015. (Items 3-4) This lien has not been satisfied and remains 
unresolved.  Besides his federal tax debts, Applicant is indebted to medical and consumer 
creditors holding delinquent accounts exceeding $17,000. (Items 4 and 6-7) Before 
petitioning for Chapter 7 protection in 2015, these debts had not been addressed by 
Applicant. 
In December 2018, Applicant petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (Item 
7) What asset and claims schedules Applicant included in his Chapter 7 petition are not 
documented. Without any special exceptions noted in his discharge order, his bankruptcy 
discharge is presumed to cover and discharge his SOR-listed medical and consumer 
debts. Absent special circumstances not developed in his Chapter 7 petition, none of his 
tax debts with the IRS were discharged in bankruptcy. 
Applicant attributed some of his debt delinquencies to unemployment conditions. 
(Item 3) In his PSI with an OPM investigator in January 2018, Applicant described his 
financial situation “as terrible” and assured that he would begin making monthly payments 
on all of his listed debts. (Item 3) To date, however, he has provided no evidence of 
payments or payment plans with any of his listed  creditors. 
Further, Applicant has not provided any evidence of financial counseling, 
performance evaluations, or civic contributions relevant and material to making a whole-
person assessment of his trustworthiness and reliability. Without this additional 
information, whole-person assessments are limited to his finances 
Policies 
The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the 
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into 
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, 
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and 
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns. 
3 
   
  
    
  
  
   
     
    
    
   
    
     
      
        
     
    
     
    
          
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
     
   
  
   
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security 
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require 
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to 
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the 
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG 
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial 
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines 
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an 
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is 
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the 
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual 
guidelines are pertinent in this case: 
Financial Considerations 
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy 
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, 
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, 
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of 
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater 
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to 
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18. 
Burden of Proof 
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or 
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding 
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive 
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence 
4 
     
    
   
  
 
   
 
    
 
    
      
    
  
    
       
 
         
  
  
     
   
 
       
   
    
  
   
     
       
      
 
    
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a 
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that 
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences 
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the 
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial 
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that 
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain 
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the 
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or 
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, 
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or 
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances 
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to file federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2000-2004, 2007, and 2014-2015; his accrual of delinquent tax 
debts exceeding $44,000, and his accumulation of delinquent medical and consumer 
debts exceeding $17.000. Applicant’s tax filing failures and debt delinquencies warrant 
the application of four of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 
19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts, regardless of the 
ability to do so”; 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”; and 19(f), “failure 
to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to 
pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” 
Applicant’s admitted tax return filing lapses and accumulated delinquent debts 
negate the need for any independent proof. See Directive 5220.6 at E3.1.14; 
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006). Each of Applicant’s admitted debts are 
fully documented and create some judgment issues. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 
(App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required 
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that 
5 
     
    
 
     
   
 
  
    
   
   
  
     
  
   
    
 
 
   
 
   
  
   
  
 
    
  
      
     
   
       
   
  
      
    
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security 
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and 
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving tax filing lapses 
and debt delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of addressing and resolving federal and state tax 
delinquencies and other debt delinquencies are critical to an assessment of an 
applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and 
guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a 
sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR 
Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited circumstances (i.e., 
unemployment) are somewhat extenuating and entitle Applicant to partial mitigation
credit for his inability to address his debt delinquencies. MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” has 
partial application to Applicant’s situation, but is very limited to his medical and 
consumer debts which are legally imputed to be covered in his February 2019 
bankruptcy discharge. Of no extenuating benefit are his multiple failures to file his 
federal tax returns for the tax years in issue, as required by law, and his listed federal 
taxes covered by federal tax liens. 
Because bankruptcy discharges are presumed to cover non-scheduled, non-
priority unsecured debts, Applicant’s SOR-listed medical and consumer debts are 
covered by Applicant’s bankruptcy discharge, irrespective of their inclusion in his 
bankruptcy schedules. This is because that in the absence of fraud in a no-asset case 
(as Applicant’s appears to be) all unsecured, nonpriority debts are considered 
discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a discharge, even when they are not listed 
in a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 f.3d 110, 114 (3rd  Cir. 1996); Francis v. 
Nat’l revenue Service, Inc. 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr. SD Fl 2010) 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance 
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely resolution of 
federal and state tax debts. ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014); 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 98-0761 
(App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999). In Applicant’s case, his multiple failures to timely file his 
federal income tax returns for the years in issue, as required by law, and his inability to 
establish documented payment initiatives with the IRS to address his unresolved federal 
tax liens and other delinquent taxes owed for tax years 2000-2004 and 2007, both 
before and after the initiation of the security clearance process, preclude favorable 
findings and conclusions with respect to raised security concerns over the state of his 
finances. Credited to Applicant are his discharged medical and consumer debts covered 
by SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.o. 
6 
 
  
  
    
  
   
  
 
    
    
      
     
     
    
Whole-Person Assessment 
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his delinquent debts to merit enough positive credit to 
mitigate financial concerns. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in fulfilling his tax-filing 
responsibilities and addressing his finances reflect too little evidence of restored 
financial responsibility and judgment to overcome reasonable doubts about his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. 
Conclusions are warranted that his finances are not sufficiently stabilized at this time to 
meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. Eligibility to hold 
a security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this case is inconsistent with 
the national interest. 
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the 
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I 
make the following formal findings: 
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.o:
 Against Applicant 
   For Applicant 
Conclusions 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
Roger C. Wesley 
Administrative Judge 
7 
8 
  
9 
