 
1 
 
                      
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
                          
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00341 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Applicant’s Counsel 
 
May 22, 2019 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and E. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 28, 2018 (Answer); which included 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A1~B2, and eventually requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Notice of Representation.) The case was assigned to me on 
March 7, 2019. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on March 8, 2019, scheduling the hearing for April 23, 2019. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted into evidence, and GX 5 for Administrative Notice. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf. Applicant presented 34 documents, which I marked AppXs C1~L, which 
 
2 
 
were also admitted into evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on 
May 6, 2019. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a seven-page summary of 
the facts, supported by 11 Government documents pertaining to Afghanistan, identified 
as GX 5. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR, except for SOR allegation ¶ 1.a. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 16.) He has been employed as a linguist with the defense contractor since January 
of 2017. (GX 1 at page 16.) In August of 2017, while on patrol with U.S. Marines, 
Applicant was wounded by a suicide bomber. (TR at page 38 line 14 to page 40 line 25, 
at page 82 lines 6~25, and AppX C1.) He has submitted eight letters of support (AppXs 
A, E and J), to include one from a Brigadier General (AppX E5), and numerous 
Certificates of Appreciation (AppX H1~9). 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 1.a. Applicant denied that his mother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, as 
she is now deceased. (TR at page 43 lines 16~18, and at page 44 lines 2~6.) This 
occurred in January of 2018, and Applicant could not attend her funeral as he could not 
leave the protection of his military post. (Id.)  
 
 1.b. Applicant admits that three brothers are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. (TR at page 50 line 10 to page 52 line 3, and at page 53 line 14 to page 55 
line 6.) Two of these brothers are merchants, and the third a teacher. (Id.) To the best of 
his knowledge and belief none of these brothers are connected to the Afghan 
government. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admits that a fourth brother, also a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan, was a “Clerk” for the Afghan government. (TR at page 52 line 4 to page 53 
line 12.) He is currently unemployed, but most recently worked for a U.S. company. (TR 
at page 55 lines 7~21, and at page 69 lines 7~23.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that between 2010~2016, he gave a total of about $5,000 
to a brother, in support of his, now deceased, mother. Applicant disclosed this financial 
 
3 
 
support to the U.S. Government, in January of 2011, as evidenced by his 
Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire (CFSSQ). (TR at page 
42 line 7 to page 43 line 18, at page 55 line 22 to page 56 line 11, and GX  at page 7.) 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
 2.a. Applicant answered “No” on his February 2017 e-QIP to the question: “Have 
you EVER provided financial support for any foreign national?” (GX 1 at page 51.) He 
mistakenly thought this question did not apply to his immediate family. (TR at page 56 
line 12 to page 60 line 6, and at page 71 line 1 to page 74 line 24.) Applicant had 
already disclosed his mother’s financial support, through his brother, in his January 
2011 CFSSQ. He reaffirmed his 2011 admission, just 12 days after he executed his e-
QIP, when he again executed a February 2017 CFSSQ. (GX 4 at pages 1 and 2.) I find 
no willful falsification, here. 
 
 2.b. Applicant admits that he resided in the United States illegally from about 
2006~2010. In about 2003, as an 18 year old, he started working as an interpreter for 
U.S. Forces in Afghanistan. (TR at page 22 lines 5~13, and at page 28 line 21 to page 
31 line 12.) In 2006, while Applicant was training in the United States, he discovered he 
was on a “hit list” if and when he returned to Afghanistan. (Id, and 60 line 7 to page 61 
line 9, and at page 68 line 11 to page 69 line 2.)  As a result, he went to live with a half-
brother in California from 2006~2010. (Id.) Applicant disclosed his illegal status when he 
applied for and was granted a Green Card. (TR at page 34 line 17 to page 36 line 11, 
and at page 37 line 1 to page 38 line 13.) He was again deployed back to Afghanistan in 
support of U.S. forces, and while there applied for and was granted U.S. citizenship. 
(Id.) 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following regarding Afghanistan. A U.S. 
Department of State Travel Advisory remains in effect for Afghanistan. Extremist groups 
and kidnapping syndicates are actively targeting foreign nationals. Decades of disorder 
and warfare have made Afghanistan fertile territory for international terroism.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
 
4 
 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
 
5 
 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
  Applicant has siblings who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan, and he is 
on a Taliban “hit list.” The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee. 
 
 Applicant is putting his life at risk as an interpreter for U.S. Forces. He was 
almost killed by a suicide bomber, but has returned to Afghanistan in service of his 
 
6 
 
country. His connection with his foreign relatives is clearly outweighed by his service 
and allegiance to the United States. Foreign Influence is found for Applicant. 
  
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 
7 
 
  Applicant arguably failed to answer his February 2017 e-QIP correctly. He was 
also in the United States illegally for about four years. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment 
 
 Applicant disclosed to the Government, in 2011 and again in February of 2017; 
the fact that he was providing financial aid to his mother, when he executed his 
CFSSQs. In light of these disclosures, he clearly misinterpreted the e-QIP’s question. 
More than nine years ago, Applicant feared for his life; and as a result, resided in the 
United States illegally for about four years. He is now a U.S. citizen, and is putting his 
life at risk serving his country in Afghanistan. Personal Conduct is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
8 
 
Applicant has a distinguished record of serving U.S. Forces in Afghanistan, as 
evidenced by those serving with him, to include a Brigadier General. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the Foreign Influence and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
    
  
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
