       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS    
In the matter of:      )
 ) 
----------------------------------      )  ISCR Case No. 18-02573 
     ) 
     ) 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Chris Morin,  Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se     
05/06/2019 
______________
 Decision 
______________ 
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge: 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement or criminal conduct concerns.  Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On January 11, 2019, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons 
under the drug involvement and substance misuse guidelines why DoD adjudicators 
could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security clearance, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security 
clearance shouild be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken 
under executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended. DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive); by the Security Executive Agent, Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (SEAD 4), effective June 8, 2017. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 11, 2019, and elected to have his 
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on March 6, 2019. He supplemented the record in April 2019 with a 
memorandum and did not object to any of the Government’s submissions. Applicant’s 
supplemented memorandum was admitted without objection as Item 5. 
Summary of Pleadings 
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) used, purchased, and sold marijuana 
with varying frequency from about August 2011 to at least May 2017; (b) used cocaine, 
with varying frequency, from about May 2012 to at least January 2018; and (c) was 
charged with possession of marijuana paraphernalia in about June 2012. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations covering his 
drug activities and charges with explanations. He claimed he has not used, bought, or 
sold marijuana since May 2017. He further claimed that he no longer associates with 
individuals with whom he used marijuana. Applicant claimed he will attend any drug 
rehabilitation considered necessary and will abstain from all drug involvement. And, he 
claimed he is committed to living a healthy drug-free lifestyle and has a strong support 
system that is filled with individuals committed to helping Applicant maintain a healthy 
lifestyle and drug-free living. 
Findings of Fact 
Applicant is a 38-year-old systems engineer who seeks a security clearance for a 
defense contractor. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are 
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow. 
Background 
Applicant has never married and has no children. (Items 3-4) He attended college 
classes between June 2012 and October 2017, but never earned a degree or diploma. 
Applicant reported no military service. 
Since August 2016, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (Items 2-4) He 
reported unemployment between April 2013 and August 2016 while attending school, 
and December 2012. (Item 3) 
Applicant's drug history 
Applicant was introduced to marijuana as a teenager in August 2011. (Item 4) 
Typically, he would smoke marijuana joints recreationally with friends in small quantities 
at their homes and at parties. He generally purchased marijuana from third parties before 
transferring or reselling the marijuana to his high school friends. (Item 4) Marijuana 
produced psychedelic reactions by Applicant. Between 2011 and 2014, he used 
marijuana weekly. Over the course of the next three years, he reduced his frequency of 
use to monthly and less before ceasing his use of the substance altogether. (Item 3) He 
last used marijuana in May 2017 and no longer associates with the individuals who 
2 
                                                       Policies 
supplied him marijuana. (Item 4) Applicant assured that he has no intention of resuming 
his use of illegal drugs in the foreseeable future and is willing to submit to randomized 
drug screening by his employer. (Items 2 and 5) His assurances cannot be fully accepted 
without more corroboration and substantiation. (Items 3-4) 
Beginning in May 2012, Applicant used cocaine in varying frequencies. (Item 4) 
He last used the substance in January 2018. (Item 4) He was introduced to cocaine by 
an unknown individual at a local party while in college, (Item 4) He estimated that he had 
used cocaine approximately five to seven times before he lat used the substance in 
January 2018 following his submission of his application for a security clearance. (Items 
3-4) 
In June 2012, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana paraphernalia. 
(Item 4) He pled not-guilty to the offense and was cleared of the offense in court. (GEs 3-
4) 
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision making 
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could 
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations 
that could affect the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise as security concern and 
may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that 
could mitigate security concerns. 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security 
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require 
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is 
to be evaluated in the context of the whole-person in accordance with AG, ¶ 2© 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the 
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) 
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial into 
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and impartial 
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines 
within the  context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine 
a sufficient period of an applicant's life to enable predictive judgments to be made about 
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. When evaluating an applicant's 
conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be considered together with the following AG ¶
2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for 
3 
                                                    Drug Involvement 
                                            Burden of Proof 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or 
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be 
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. [s]ecurity-clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials." See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 531 (1988). And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the 
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant. 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication 
policy concerns are pertinent herein:                                    
The Concern: The illegal use of controlled substances, to 
include the misuse of prescription and non-prescription drugs, 
and the use of other substances that causes physical or 
mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with 
their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment 
and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations . . . AG 
¶ 24. 
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or 
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding 
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive 
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence 
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for 
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that 
evidence. See United States v. Gideon, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all 
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have are 
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial 
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the 
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a 
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the 
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or 
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, 
4 
                                                         Analysis 
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or 
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be 
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. "[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials." See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 531 (1988). And, because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the 
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with th Applicant.
Applicant is a systems engineer who presents with a considerable history of drug 
involvement over an extended period of years. Principal security issues in this case 
center on Applicant's lengthy history of drug involvement that includes a still very recent 
January 2018 cocaine use. 
Drug concerns 
Over a considerable period of drug activity stretching from August 2011 to may 
2017, Applicant used, purchased, and sold marijuana. His most recent involvement with 
marijuana (use, possession, purchases, and sales) occurred in May 2017.  Besides his 
marijuana use and activity, Applicant used cocaine on multiple occasions with varying 
frequency between May 2012 and January 2018. Applicant’s admissions to using and 
possessing illegal drugs over an extended number of years raises concerns about risks 
of recurrence as well as judgment issues. Applicant’s admissions to using and 
possessing illegal drugs raises concerns about risks of recurrence as well as judgment 
issues.  On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions of the 
AGs for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶¶ 25(a), "any substance misuse,” and 25(c) 
"illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”  
While Applicant's material use and possession of illegal drugs has never been 
repeated since his acknowledged last use of marijuana in May 2017, and of cocaine in 
January 2018, in any proven way, his recurrent use and possession of marijuana and 
cocaine products is still too recent to enable safe predictions of continued avoidance of 
illegal drugs. It is too soon to fully apply any of the potentially mitigating conditions to 
Applicant's situation. While Applicant's assurances that his drug involvement is a thing of 
the past are encouraging, more time is needed to draw safe inferences that he is not a 
recurrence risk. 
Considering the record as a whole, there is insufficient probative evidence of 
sustainable mitigation to make predictable judgments about his ability to avoid drugs, 
drug purchases, and drug sales in the foreseeable future. Taking into account all of the 
5 
facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant's past marijuana and cocaine activity, he 
does not mitigate security concerns with respect to the allegations covered by 
subparagraphs ¶¶ 1.a-1.b of the SOR. Based on the not-guilty conclusions associated 
with Applicant’s 2012 possession of marijuana paraphernalia charges, allegations 
covered by SOR ¶ 1.c are unsubstantiated. 
Whole-person assessment 
In making a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, 
and good judgment, consideration is given to not only the drug involvement and 
substance misuse issues raised in the SOR, but the contributions he has and continues 
to make to his employer and the defense industry in general. Overall, though, Applicant 
has established insufficient probative evidence of his overall trustworthiness and 
understanding of DoD policy constraints on the use of illegal substances to facilitate safe 
predictions that he is at no risk of recurrence of illegal drug usage. Criteria for meeting 
security clearance requirements under the drug involvement and substance misuse 
guideline have not for the most part been met by Applicant Unfavorable conclusions are 
warranted with respect to SOR¶¶ 1.a-1.b. Favorable conclusions are warranted with 
respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.c. 
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the 
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I 
make the following formal findings: 
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):                 AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b       Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:                                         For Applicant 
:  Conclusions 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
to hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                               
        Roger C. Wesley
         Administrative Judge 
6 
7 
