 
1 
 
                               
                  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
      
        
             
 
 
                              
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00835 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Troy L. Nussbaum, Esq.,  
05/20/2019 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although the criminal 
conduct concerns are mitigated by the passage of time, Applicant failed to mitigate the 
negative whole-person assessment established by his 2013 and 2015 drug-related 
arrests. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2018, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the criminal conduct and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to a 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge for a 
determination whether to grant or deny his security clearance.  
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on June 8, 2017.   
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on November 29, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H without objection. Applicant testified at the 
hearing, as did two character witnesses. After the hearing, the parties timely submitted 
additional documentation. Accordingly, GE 4 and AE I, were admitted to the record 
without objection from either party. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 
2018.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to correct an 
error in SOR ¶ 1.b, which indicated Applicant was placed on unsupervised parole after a 
February 2015 drug offense. Without objection from Applicant, the SOR allegation was 
amended to reflect that Applicant was sentenced to unsupervised probation after the 
February 2015 offense.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 32, began working for federal contracting companies as an information 
technology professional in the healthcare sector in 2013. He has worked for his current 
employer since January 2016. His job requires him to work with personally identifiable 
information (PII) and he holds public trust eligibility. His client considers him a valuable 
asset to the agency he supports, citing his technical abilities and professionalism. He is 
seeking eligibility for access to classified information in an effort to obtain employment 
closer to his home. He completed a security clearance application in July 2017. In 
response to questions about his police record, he disclosed a February 20142 arrest for 
possession of a Schedule III substance. He did not disclose any derogatory information 
in response to questions about his history of illegal drug use or other drug activity. The 
ensuing investigation revealed another drug-related arrest in December 2013.3  
 
 Between January and December 2013, Applicant worked for a federal 
contracting company. Although the nature of the job in unclear from the record, 
Applicant admitted that it required public trust eligibility, which another government 
agency granted in July 2013. In December 2013, Applicant received a phone call from 
his older brother asking for help changing a tire after a minor car accident. When 
Applicant arrived at his brother’s location, he found his brother’s car unattended while 
the police arrested his brother further down the block. Applicant approached his 
brother’s car and began to clear the street of the tools his brother had been using to 
change the tire. When Applicant returned the tools to the trunk of the car, he discovered 
a stash of the marijuana hidden in the trunk. Not wanting his brother to get in any more 
trouble, Applicant moved the marijuana from his brother’s car into his car. At the time of 
the incident, Applicant was aware of his employer’s zero-tolerance drug policy. After 
                                                          
2 The date Applicant reported of the security clearance application was a mistake. 
 
3 Tr. 22-26, 29-30, 33-34; GE 1-2; AE C-D. 
 
3 
 
picking his brother up from the police station, Applicant was stopped by the police who 
discovered the marijuana in Applicant’s car. He was arrested and charged with 
possession of marijuana with the intent to distribute. Ultimately, the charge was not 
prosecuted. Applicant claims that he will not act similarly in the future.4 
 
 Between December 2014 and January 2016, Applicant was working for a 
different federal contracting company. At the hearing, he testified that his position 
required access to PII and he was required to maintain public trust eligibility. In 
February 2015, Applicant and his friends were traveling to a concert in another state. As 
he passed through a neighboring state, Applicant was stopped for a moving violation. 
During the stop, the police discovered Ketamine, a Schedule III substance, in 
Applicant’s possession. Applicant claims the he did not purchase the drug, but that it 
was given to him by “a friend of a friend.” When questioned about the substance, 
Applicant lied and told the officer it was cocaine. At hearing, Applicant explained that he 
thought having cocaine would be considered a lesser offense. He also admitted that, 
but for his arrest, he intended to use the ketamine at the concert in knowing violation of 
his employer’s drug policy. The court sentenced Applicant to a deferred-adjudication 
program and required him to serve 100 hours of community service, attend substance-
abuse classes, and pay the fees assessed by the court. He completed terms of his 
sentence and was released from unsupervised probation in July 2016.5   
 
Applicant did not report either of his arrests to his respective employers. He 
claims that he did not believe that he had an obligation to do so. In particular, Applicant 
did not believe that he was required to report his 2015 unsupervised probation to his 
employer because it did not affect the quality of his work. Applicant did not list the 2013 
arrest on his security clearance application because he believed the arrest was 
expunged and his criminal defense lawyer advised him that he did not need to disclose 
the arrest in the future. Despite his two drug-related arrests, Applicant claims that his 
history of illegal drug use is limited to experimenting with marijuana two or three times in 
high school. He claims that he has no intent to use or possess illegal drugs in the future. 
In anticipation of the hearing, Applicant completed a second substance-abuse course. 
Applicant believes that he has matured since his last arrest five years ago. He moved 
away from what he described as an unhealthy environment and is now living in his 
childhood home with his wife. He spends his free time with his wife or on home 
projects.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 Tr. 34-39, 44-45, 50, 58-60; GE 4; AE A.  
 
5 Tr.  34-39, 44-45, 51-53, 57-60; GE 3; AE I. 
 
6 Tr. 30-31, 42-43, 53-55, 61-62; AE B, H. 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal activity creates doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness... and calls into question a personal ability or willingness to comply with 
law, rules and regulations.7 Applicant’s drug-related arrests in 2013 and 2015 are 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 30. 
 
 
5 
 
disqualifying under the criminal conduct guideline as evidence of criminal conduct,8 as 
well as a pattern of minor offenses that when considered together cast doubt on the 
individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.9 Although the conduct is not enough 
on its own for disqualification under the drug involvement guideline, it is disqualifying 
conduct under the personal conduct guideline. Applicant’s multiple instances of drug-
related misconduct support a negative whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly 
safeguard against classified or sensitive information.10  
 
While the criminal conduct concerns may be mitigated by the passage of time,11 
the personal conduct concerns about Applicant’s credibility, judgment and 
trustworthiness remain. On at least two occasions, Applicant willingly and knowingly 
engaged in drug-related criminal conduct while working in positions that required public 
trust eligibility and in violation of his employers’ drug policies, showing a pattern of poor 
judgment. His behavior at the time of the arrests and his handling of each incident 
reveals an ongoing credibility issue. During the 2015 arrest, he lied to a police officer, 
intentionally reporting false information in hopes of minimizing the potential 
consequences of his actions. In his current attempt to obtain a security clearance, he 
did not properly disclose his arrest history or drug involvement on his security clearance 
application despite the plain language of the relevant questions.12 In addition, 
Applicant’s testimony about his history of illegal drug use was not credible. It is unlikely 
that an individual would give an illegal substance to an acquaintance who was not a 
known drug user. Likewise, it is not credible that Applicant, who claims to have no 
history of illegal drug use since high school, would accept any illegal drugs from an 
acquaintance, let alone plan to use it. The favorable evidence in the record about 
Applicant’s technical abilities or his value to his government client do not overcome the 
negative whole-person assessment raised by his misconduct and lack of credibility.  
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d) in addition to the mitigating conditions available under the 
personal conduct guideline. The present adjudication highlights ongoing concerns about 
Applicant’s credibility, reliability, and trustworthiness. When confronted with a conflict of 
interest between his fiduciary duty as a public trust holder and those of his personal 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 31(b). 
 
9 AG ¶31(a).  
 
10 AG ¶ 16(c). 
 
11 AG ¶ 32(a).  
 
12 Although the SOR does not allege that that Applicant engaged in drug-related criminal conduct while 
holding public trust eligibility or that he falsified the police record or drug history questions on his security 
clearance application, both can be considered in the analysis of the applicability of the relevant mitigating 
conditions.  
 
 
6 
 
circumstances, he resolved the conflicts in his self-interest. Of particular concern is 
Applicant’s failure to report his criminal conduct to his respective employers at the time 
the incidents occurred. His claim that he unaware of his duty to report such adverse 
information is disingenuous. It is more likely that Applicant was trying to avoid the 
professional consequences of his off-duty misconduct. Furthermore, Applicant’s failure 
to report prevented his employers and the government from assessing his continued 
public trust eligibility at the time the misconduct occurred. In deciding that his off-duty 
misconduct did not affect his work, Applicant made himself, not the government, 
adjudicator of any potential security risks associated with his misconduct.  
 
The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to make “an examination of 
a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person 
is an acceptable security risk.”13 Given Applicant’s past conduct, he has not 
demonstrated that he is a suitable candidate for access to classified information at this 
time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct    AGAINST APPPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
