1 
 
                         
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
                                     
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 18-02377  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kelly M. Folks, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
05/21/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 3, 2016. On 
October 17, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant timely  answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file 
of relevant material (FORM) on February 6, 2019. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 20, 2019. The Government’s evidence, included in the FORM  and identified as 
2 
 
Items 1 through 6, is admitted without objection. Applicant responded to the FORM with 
a packet of documents, which was marked as Applicant Exhibit A, and admitted into the 
record without objection. The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2019. Based on my 
review of the documentary evidence, I find that Applicant has mitigated the financial 
concerns. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is married, and he 
has three adult children. (Item 3) He served in the U.S. Air Force on active duty, receiving 
an honorable discharge. He obtained an undergraduate degree in 2012, along with 
various certifications during his career. He has held a security clearance. Applicant has 
been employed with his current employer since June 2015. (Item 3, 10) 
 
Financial 
 
 SOR alleges10 delinquent accounts (1.a-1.j) totaling about $67,000,  including 
seven student loans, totaling $31,000, a 2013 judgment in the amount of $4,031, and a 
2017 state tax lien in the amount of $5,427.73. (Items 1, 8) Applicant admitted  the debts 
listed on the SOR. (Item 2) His credit reports confirm the  delinquent debts. (Items 5, 6, 
7) 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to medical issues, unemployment on three 
occasions over the past two years, his mother’s illness and death, four family member 
deaths, and a knee surgery in 2012. (AX A) In addition, Applicant’s unexpected heart 
attack in 2014, while being the power of attorney for his ailing mother who passed in 2016, 
exacerbated his expenses. Applicant’s older brother died one year before his mother. His 
cousin died in 2017. Funeral trips and expenses decreased his ability to pay all bills in a 
timely fashion.  
 
 Applicant explained during his August 2017 investigative interview that after 
several bad years financially due to the myriad issues listed above, his financial situation 
is improving. (Item 10) He is working with all creditors. He understands that his credit took 
a downturnl the last few years due to caring for his mother emotionally and financially. 
His financial situation is getting back on track. (Item 10)    
 
 SOR 1.a is a loan now owed by another company. Applicant established contact 
with the company. He has had to track down to whom the debt is owed. He  has a payment 
plan in place. (AX A) 
 
 As to SOR allegations 1.b to 1.h, Applicant stated that he had some student loans 
that he fell behind with payments. His Facility Security Officer (FSO) stated in a letter that 
Applicant worked diligently to get caught up. AX A) The loans changed to various 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 3) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
collection agencies and he wrote a letter of hardship to explain his circumstances. Also, 
he submitted as a response to FORM, documentation that he completed the forebearance 
and rehabilitation process.The student loan in 1.b,  was settled and Applicant has satisfied 
the debt. Applicant showed two payments of $453 were made. He also made some 
payments in 2017. (AX A) As to the remaining student loans, Applicant has a payment 
plan of  to pay $766 monthly for 36 months.This will total $27,600. The six student loans 
are now  rehabilitated; and he is not past due on any balance. He submitted receipts. (AE 
A) 
 
 As to SOR 1 i., Applicant provided documentation that he paid the judgment and 
disputes that he owes this amount. He contacted the attorney in the proper county and 
has not heard back. This was the result of a loan that his wife obtained prior to Applicant’s 
period of unemployment. (Item 10) However in his packet to the response to the FORM, 
he submitted a form from the court that stated the judgment is satisified. (AX A) 
 
 As to SOR 1.j, Applicant candidly addressed the issue of the tax lien ($5,457) as 
a result of personal taxes being mistakenly sent to the wrong state. He hired an 
accountant to correct a tax refund. He submitted his pay stub as proof that state one  was 
listed as his residence and a 2016 letter for request of nonresident  tax refund in the 
amount of $2,569 . Applicant also submitted a turbo tax report that confirmed $5,071 was 
tax taken from his wages and given to state one.  Applicant submitted a 2016 letter to the 
Comptroller of state two  to process an amended income tax form. This documentation 
shows that state taxes were properly paid to state two and Applicant was due refunds. 
(AX A) Nonpayment of state taxes, although, discussed in the FORM, are not evident in 
the record or the investigative interview in 2017. 
 
 Applicant provided documentation that he has paid non-SOR debts that were 
mentioned in the FORM, but not the allegations. He is current with his mortgage and has 
paid a large water bill in the total amount of $3,252 with monthly payments of at least 
$250. Applicant submitted the payment history as proof of payments. (AX A) His credit 
bureau report from 2016 reveals many accounts that are paid as agreed. He provided 
documentation to prove his claim. (AX A) 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling and did not shirk from any delinquent 
accounts or student loan. He contacted all creditors and arranged payment plans when 
he resumed employment. His wife also works and they utilize a budget. 
   
     Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, and failure to pay his 
delinquent debts or set up any payment plans raises two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
6 
 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of  the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the debt. 
 
 Applicant had extraordinary events that occurred in the past few years that were 
beyond his control. He cared for his mother until her death. He was unemployed several 
times. Other family members died and he attempted to carry on responsibly. He did not 
shirk from his creditors. He provided documentation that his student loans are 
consolidated and he is making timely payments. His other delinquent debts have been 
satisified or disputed. He suffered his own medical issues. He submitted sufficient 
information in response to the FORM to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. Applicant has furnished sufficient information to meet his burden. The five listed 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
     Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant is married and has three children. He has worked in the contracting field 
for many years. A string of extraordinary events occurred in his life within a short span of 
time. He acted responsibly. He has addressed his student loans and the other delinquent 
debts. Some are satisfied or were mistakes. His unemployment exacerbated his 
tragedies.  Circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances, and he 
acted reasonably and responsibly to address his delinquent debts. He has carried his 
burden of proof.    
7 
 
 
     
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:    For Applicant:   
 
     Conclusion 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
