 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 18-01736 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Liam Apostol and Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/29/2019 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 The statement of reasons (SOR) alleges, and Applicant admits he had eight 
misdemeanor-level, alcohol-related arrests from 2000 to 2017. He made some positive 
steps towards rehabilitation; however, security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption) are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On September 30, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On September 10, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017. The SOR set forth security concerns arising under 
Guideline G. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
On October 12, 2018, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On January 9, 2019, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On January 25, 2019, the case was assigned to me. On March 11, 2019, the 
 
2 
                                         
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for March 25, 2019. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled; however, 
Applicant objected because he did not have 15 days of notice of the date, time, and 
location of the hearing. The hearing was terminated, and a new hearing was scheduled. 
On March 29, 2019, the hearing was scheduled for May 2, 2019. The second hearing was 
held as scheduled using video teleconference.    
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
five exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 11-14, 69; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-E) On May 15, 2019, DOHA 
received a copy of the hearing transcript. The record closed on May 16, 2019. (Tr. 71-72, 
77; AE F)  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 
and 1.f through 1.i. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor who has been 
employed as an engineering analyst for his current employer since 2015.2 (Tr. 67) He has 
been employed in the aerospace industry for 16 years. (Tr. 73; AE A) His annual salary 
is $85,000. (Tr. 74) In 2018, he received several awards from his employer. (AE D) In 
2018, he received a U.S. patent. (AE E) He completed numerous work-related training 
courses. (AE A) In 2000, he received a General Education Diploma, and he has not 
attended college. (Tr. 7) In 2003, he married, and he has two children ages 6 and 13. (Tr. 
8-9) He has not served in the military. (Tr. 67) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The SOR alleges the following conduct of security significance. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges and Applicant admitted that he consumed alcohol at times in 
excess and to the point of intoxication from about 2000 to at least July 2018. (SOR 
response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges in about February 2017, Applicant was charged with Battery 
and Disorderly Conduct, and he was consuming alcohol at the time of his arrest. Applicant 
and some friends were at a bar drinking alcohol. (Tr. 42) Applicant drank six or seven 
drinks, and he was intoxicated. (Tr. 42, 45) One of Applicant’s friends got into a fight. (Tr. 
42-43) The bouncer told Applicant and his friends to leave the bar; a bouncer put his hand 
on Applicant’s chest; and Applicant pushed the bouncer’s hand away. (Tr. 42-44) 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the information in this paragraph are Applicant’s 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA) and his 
resume. (Government Exhibit (GE) 1; AE A) 
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant and his friends went to another bar where the police arrested Applicant for 
pushing the bouncer’s hand when they were leaving the bar. (Tr. 43-44) The charge was 
dismissed. (Tr. 46) Applicant conceded that he showed poor judgment. (Tr. 47-48) 
Applicant was not convicted of any crime for his conduct in about February 2017.  
  
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges in about January 2015, Applicant was charged with Disturbing 
the Peace, and he was consuming alcohol around the time of his arrest. Applicant was at 
a casino, and he drank four or five beers. (Tr. 39) He was gambling, and he got into an 
argument with another gambler. (Tr. 31-38; GE 1 at 47; GE 2 at 6) Security guards 
escorted Applicant, his spouse, and another patron from the gambling area. The security 
guards transferred them to the police. (Tr. 38) Applicant posted $1,150 bail, and he was 
released from jail. (Tr. 41) Applicant went to court, and a judge dismissed the charge of 
Disturbing the Peace because the casino representative did not appear at his hearing. 
(Tr. 38-40) Applicant’s bail was refunded. (Tr. 41) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges in about February 2010, Applicant was charged with Disorderly 
Conduct and Intoxication. Applicant drank 6 to 10 drinks at home with a friend, and he 
and the friend got into an argument. (Tr. 47-50) A neighbor called the police, and Applicant 
was intoxicated and disrespectful to the police. (Tr. 47-50) The police arrested Applicant 
for Disorderly Conduct and Intoxication. (Tr. 47-50) He pleaded guilty to Disorderly 
Conduct and Intoxication, and he received 30 days in jail (suspended), a fine, and 
probation before judgment for 18 months. (Tr. 50) He successfully completed probation, 
and he does not have a conviction for this offense. (Tr. 50)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges in about October 2008, Applicant was charged with Intoxication 
and Interfering with Arrest. Applicant and some friends were drinking at a barbecue at 
Applicant’s residence. (Tr. 50-53) Applicant drank 8 to 10 beers. (Tr. 53) A neighbor called 
the police, and Applicant was disrespectful to the police. (Tr. 52) He was found guilty of 
Interfering with Arrest, and the Intoxication charge was dismissed. (Tr. 53) He paid a $300 
fine. (Tr. 53)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges in about January 2004, Applicant was charged with Assault and 
Disorderly Conduct, and Applicant consumed alcohol before his arrest. Applicant was at 
a party consuming alcohol, and he allowed someone to borrow his car. (Tr. 54) An 
accident involving Applicant’s vehicle occurred within Applicant’s view, and he went to the 
location of the accident. (Tr-54-55) The police arrived, and Applicant was arrested. (Tr. 
54-55) Applicant could not remember what he did or why he was arrested. (Tr. 54-55) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges in about December 2003, Applicant was charged with 
Intoxication and Disorderly Conduct. Applicant drank 8 to 12 beers, and he was 
intoxicated. (Tr. 55-56) He argued with someone at his house, and the police were called. 
(Tr. 55-56) Applicant argued with the police, and he was arrested for Intoxication and 
Disorderly Conduct. (Tr. 57) He was found guilty of public intoxication, and he received a 
$430 fine and 18 months of probation. (Tr. 57) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges in about July 2002, Applicant was charged with Minor in 
Possession of Alcohol, Possession of Paraphernalia, and Interfering with a Public 
 
4 
                                         
 
Servant. Applicant was intoxicated, and he engaged in an altercation with the police. (Tr. 
58) Applicant accidently kicked an officer in the face. (Tr. 58) Applicant pleaded guilty to 
Minor in Possession of Alcohol and Possession of Paraphernalia. (Tr. 59)3 The charge of 
Interfering with a Public Servant was dismissed. (Tr. 59)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges in about August 2000, Applicant was charged with Minor in 
Possession of Alcohol. Applicant admitted he was arrested for and committed this 
offense. (Tr. 59-60; SOR response) 
 
In 2004, Applicant received an alcohol assessment. (Tr. 64) He did not receive a 
diagnosis of an alcohol-use disorder or alcohol dependence. (Tr. 64) There was no 
recommendation that he receive alcohol-related counseling or therapy. (Tr. 62-63)  
 
Applicant has not been inside of a bar since 2017. (Tr. 60) The only time he 
consumed alcohol after he received the SOR was when he and his spouse split a bottle 
of wine on December 31, 2018. (Tr. 62-63) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
                                            
3 In 2002, Applicant’s security clearance was denied because he failed to disclose his arrest for 
possession of drug paraphernalia on his security clearance application. (Tr. 65, 73) He has never held a 
security clearance. No adverse inference is made because of the denial of his security clearance 16 years 
ago. 
 
5 
                                         
 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
applicant’s personal or professional history that may disqualify the applicant for eligibility 
for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  AG ¶ 22 lists conditions under the alcohol consumption guideline that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying including: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
 
6 
                                         
 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, 
treatment, or abstinence.  
 
  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. The police arrested Applicant eight times from August 
2000 to February 2017 for behavior related to his alcohol consumption. On several 
occasions, he consumed more than five beers. The record establishes that he engaged 
in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired judgment.4  
 
  AG ¶ 23 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
                                            
4 “Binge drinking is the most common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United States.” See 
the Center for Disease Control website, (stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
defines binge drinking as a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 
0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and when 
women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-
drinking.htm. There are other definitions of “binge alcohol consumption” that involve different alcohol-
consumption amounts and patterns. 
 
7 
                                         
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
   
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a fairly 
lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 
3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). See also ISCR Case No. 08-
04232 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2009) (affirming denial of security clearance for Applicant with 
alcohol-related criminal offenses for six years prior to hearing). For example, in ISCR 
Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board reversed the 
administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant continued to drink 
even after his second alcohol-related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB 
had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 2000, 
six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his alcohol 
consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol (not to 
intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued alcohol 
consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and 
capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) (involving 
case with most recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and reversing 
administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
Applicant presented evidence supporting mitigation of alcohol-consumption 
concerns. Applicant has never been diagnosed with an alcohol-use disorder or alcohol 
dependence. He ended his alcohol consumption when the received the SOR on 
September 10, 2018, except for drinking part of a bottle of wine with his wife on December 
31, 2018. He does not intend to drink alcohol in the future. He has never been arrested 
for an alcohol-relating driving offense. 
 
The evidence against mitigation is more persuasive. The police arrested Applicant 
eight times from August 2000 to February 2017 for behavior related to his alcohol 
consumption. He engaged in binge-alcohol consumption on several occasions that led to 
his arrest for being disrespectful to police. He abstained from alcohol consumption for 
less than six months. I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on 
alcohol consumption and Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption. I have lingering 
doubts and concerns about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment pertaining to his history of alcohol consumption. Alcohol consumption security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. “In evaluating an applicant’s case, a 
Judge must carefully consider the record as a whole. This includes not only considering the 
extent to which an applicant’s circumstances raise concerns about his or her reliability but 
also giving fair consideration of the applicant’s mitigating evidence.” ISCR Case No. 12-
09900 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00424 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 
20, 2016)). My comments under Guideline G are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor who has been 
employed as an engineering analyst for his current employer since 2015.  He has been 
employed in the aerospace industry for 16 years. His annual salary is $85,000. In 2018, 
he received several awards from his employer. In 2018, he received a U.S. patent. He 
completed numerous work-related training courses. 
 
The police arrested Applicant eight times from August 2000 to February 2017 for 
behavior related to his alcohol consumption. His current abstinence from alcohol 
consumption is for less than six months before his hearing. Based on these factors, I have 
lingering doubts and concerns about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. A significant probability of alcohol-related judgment errors in the future 
continues to exist, and this possibility of future judgment errors raises ongoing questions 
about his reliability and trustworthiness. See AG ¶ 21.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. I have carefully applied the law, as 
set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude that Guideline G security 
concerns are not mitigated at this time. More time without an alcohol-related incident 
 
9 
                                         
 
involving the police or binge-alcohol consumption must elapse before security concerns 
will be alleviated. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
