 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00763 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Moira Modzelewsky, Esq., Department Counsel and  
Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
05/01/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by his history of marijuana use, including after 
being granted a security clearance and access to sensitive compartmented information 
(SCI) in 2011. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2018, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the drug involvement and substance misuse and personal 
conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on June 8, 2017.   
 
 
 
2 
 
the case be submitted to a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
administrative judge for a determination whether to deny his security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on November 28, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, 
without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing, as did two character witnesses. He 
did not offer any additional documents for consideration. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on December 7, 2018.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 38, has worked for his employer, a federal contacting company, as a 
software engineer since August 2013. He worked for another federal contracting from 
2011 to 2013. He initially completed a security clearance application in 2009 in 
anticipation of employment. However, the application was denied in January 2010 by 
another government agency (OGA), citing Applicant’s history of marijuana use and his 
deliberate failure to disclose it on his security clearance application. Applicant reapplied 
for access to classified information in early 2011, this time disclosing his previous 
marijuana use. In February 2011, he signed OGA’s security policy advisory about 
improper drug use, confirming his understanding that use of illegal drugs was strictly 
prohibited and that failure to observe the policy could constitute grounds for 
disqualification from access to OGA facilities and information. He completed a 
polygraph examination in March 2011 and expressed his willingness to comply with 
OGA’s drug deterrence policy. In April 2011, OGA granted Applicant a top-secret 
clearance and access to SCI.2  
 
Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application in January 
2016, disclosing marijuana use in July 2014 and again in July 2015. He confirmed the 
details of his marijuana use in an October 2016 subject interview. In May 2017, OGA 
suspended Applicant’s access to classified information and SCI.3  
 
 In August 2013, Applicant began working for his current employer as a senior 
software engineer. Although he was subject to urinalysis testing upon hiring, his 
employer does subject its employees to random urinalysis. In the summer 2014, he was 
promoted to a director position, supervising 33 people. Shortly after assuming his new 
position, Applicant used marijuana with his wife at the home of another couple. He used 
the drug again under the same circumstances a year later. He claims he did not report 
the marijuana use at the time of either incident because he did not know he had an 
obligation to do so. However, he acknowledged that he feared disclosure would result in 
the loss of his job. When OGA suspended Applicant’s clearance in May 2017, his 
employer, moved him to another director level position that does not require access to 
classified information. While his employer acknowledges Applicant’s lapse in judgment, 
they do not believe his actions were malicious or done with the intent to compromise 
                                                          
2 GE 1 - 2.  
 
3 Tr. 33, 38, 46-52. 
 
3 
 
national security. The company continues to endorse Applicant’s ongoing access to 
classified information. 4 
 
 Applicant’s history of illegal drug use began in college. Applicant admits to using 
marijuana at least twice each semester between 1999 and 2002. He abstained from 
illegal drug use for the next six years because the drug no longer appealed to him. He 
began using the drug again between 2008 and 2009, while he was self-employed. He 
and his wife used the drug together, at least once per month, at home. In 2008, he also 
attempted to grow marijuana plants from seeds, citing an interest in horticulture. 
Applicant described his use in 2014 and 2015 as a single puff on a marijuana cigarette. 
He admits that each time he used marijuana, he recalled the OGA drug policy advisory. 
Applicant admits stress management has motivated his use of marijuana over the 
years. In September 2017, Applicant sought a substance abuse evaluation. Based on 
the in-person evaluation and the results of a battery of tests, the psychologist 
determined that Applicant did not have a substance abuse problem or any other mental-
health problem that would significantly impair his judgment.5  
 
 In addition to the psychological evaluation, Applicant also attended two additional 
sessions with the psychologist. Applicant believes that he has learned how to better 
identify and handle his stress levels. He believes he has implemented habits to support 
his sobriety, such as regular exercise. Applicant’s wife obtained a medical marijuana 
card from a friend who is a physician. He believes that she continues to use marijuana 
in their home at least once per month. Applicant claims that he does not intend to use 
marijuana in the future, and provided a signed statement to that effect.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 34-35; 58-59, 69-70; Answer. 
 
5 Tr. 38-40, 42-46, 53-56, 66, 71-73; Answer.  
 
6 Tr. 40-42, 54, 60-65, 68-69, 75; Answer.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness, because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.7 Applicant admits a history of 
marijuana use, with varying frequency, from 1999 to 2009 that resulted in his being 
denied a security clearance in 2010. He also admits to using marijuana on two 
occasions after being granted access to classified information and SCI in 2011. His 
conduct invokes drug involvement and substance misuse disqualifying conditions ¶ 
25(a) and ¶ 25(f). Furthermore, Applicant used marijuana after signing the OGA drug 
policy advisory, which clearly stated that violation of the policy could result in the 
revocation of access to OGA facilities and information, both of which he required for his 
position at the time. Personal conduct disqualifying condition ¶16(f) applies. None of the 
drug involvement or personal conduct mitigating conditions apply.  
 
OGA granted Applicant access to classified information in 2011 after he gave 
written and verbal assurances that he would not use illegal drugs in the future. He 
                                                          
7  See, AG ¶ 24.  
 
 
5 
 
voluntarily and willfully made this commitment. He then reneged on his promise and 
chose not to disclose his misconduct to OGA to protect his self-interests. This is not 
mitigated by the favorable facts in the record: the passage of time since his last known 
use of illegal drugs; his understanding and management of his triggers; the changes he 
made in his life to support sobriety; and the endorsement of his employer of his request 
for continued access to classified information.  
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to 
make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”8 Applicant engaged in 
conduct that supports a negative whole-person assessment of his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. His behavior also casts doubt on his ability to follow rules and 
regulations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement and  
Substance Misuse:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct    AGAINST APPPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
