 
1 
 
                               
                  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
      
        
             
 
                               
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02646 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark A. Myers, Esq. 
05/23/2019 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 26, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on December 11, 2018, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 25, 2019, he 
changed his request to a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on February 28, 2019. The hearing was convened as scheduled on May 
8, 2019. Department Counsel amended the SOR at the hearing by withdrawing SOR ¶ 
1.a. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through Q, which were 
admitted without objection. 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant both requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Taiwan. Without objection, I have taken administrative 
notice of the facts contained in the requests. The facts in the written requests will not be 
repeated verbatim in this decision, but are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. His job 
is contingent upon him receiving a security clearance. He has a bachelor’s degree. He 
is married with one child.1 
 
 Applicant was born in the United States to parents who had emigrated from 
Taiwan. His two siblings were also born in the United States. One sibling works for the 
U.S. military. His parents became U.S. citizens while retaining their Taiwanese 
citizenships. Applicant’s parents and siblings live in the United States.2 
 
 Applicant has worked for a U.S. company since 2002. His job required him to 
travel throughout the world, and he worked for the company in Taiwan from 2003 to 
2005. He has worked in the United States since 2005.3 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a Taiwanese citizen. They met when he was visiting Taiwan in 
2009. He sponsored her to immigrate to the United States. They married in the United 
States. She is a permanent resident (green card holder), and she plans to apply to 
become a U.S. citizen. Their child was born in the United States.4 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is deceased. His wife’s father and her three siblings are 
citizens and residents of Taiwan. None of Applicant’s in-laws work for the Taiwanese 
government. His father-in-law owned a small business before he retired. Applicant does 
not provide financial support to his in-laws. He talks to his father-in-law about once a 
week when his wife talks to him. He talks to his wife’s siblings less often.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14-16; GE 1; AE A, B, D. 
 
2 Tr. at 15; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 29; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 17-19; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A, M. 
 
5 Tr. at 19-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE C, P. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant does not own any property or other assets in Taiwan. He owns a home 
and other assets in the United States. He estimated his net worth at $600,000. He 
credibly testified that his in-laws in Taiwan could not be used to coerce or intimidate him 
into revealing classified information, and that he would report any attempt to do so.6 
 
Applicant is active in his community. He submitted documents and letters 
attesting to his strong moral character and outstanding job performance. He is praised 
for his honesty, trustworthiness, dependability, dedication, reliability, work ethic, 
integrity, and loyalty to the United States.7  
 
Taiwan  
 
The United States and Taiwan enjoy a robust unofficial relationship. The 1979 
U.S.-P.R.C. Joint Communique switched diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing. 
In the Joint Communique, the United States recognized the Government of the People’s 
Republic of China as the sole legal government of China, acknowledging the Chinese 
position that there is but one China and Taiwan is part of China. The Joint Communique 
also stated that the people of the United States will maintain cultural, commercial, and 
other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan. The American Institute in Taiwan 
(AIT) is responsible for implementing U.S. policy toward Taiwan. 
 
The United States does not support Taiwan independence. Maintaining strong, 
unofficial relations with Taiwan is a major U.S. goal, in line with the U.S. desire to further 
peace and stability in Asia. The 1979 Taiwan Relations Act provides the legal basis for 
the unofficial relationship between the United States and Taiwan, and enshrines the 
U.S. commitment to assist Taiwan in maintaining its defensive capability. The United 
States insists on the peaceful resolution of cross-Strait differences, opposes unilateral 
changes to the status quo by either side, and encourages both sides to continue their 
constructive dialogue on the basis of dignity and respect.  
 
The United States faces a serious threat to its national security from Chinese 
intelligence operations. China aggressively targets U.S. sensitive and protected 
information and Chinese actors are the world’s most active perpetrators of economic 
espionage. Taiwan has also been an active collector of U.S. economic technologies that 
have sensitive military applications. Numerous cases have arisen involving the illegal 
export or attempted export of sensitive, dual-use technology to Taiwan.  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 22-23, 27-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE H. 
 
7 AE A, C, G. 
 
4 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s wife’s father and her three siblings are citizens and residents of 
Taiwan. Taiwan has been an active collector of U.S. economic technologies that have 
sensitive military applications. Numerous cases have arisen involving the illegal export 
or attempted export of sensitive, dual-use technology to Taiwan. Applicant’s foreign 
contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and 
through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
6 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Taiwan. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States. 
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen. His parents and two siblings are U.S. siblings 
and residents. One sibling works for the U.S. military. His wife is a permanent resident 
of the United States with plans to apply to become a U.S. citizen. Their child was born in 
the United States. All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States. None of his in-laws 
work for the Taiwanese government. 
I find that Applicant’s ties to Taiwan are outweighed by his deep and long-
standing relationships and loyalties in the United States. His closest family, life, home, 
assets, and professional career are in the United States. Taiwan collects U.S. 
intelligence, as does other U.S. allies, but it does not have a poor human rights record, 
and there is no indication that it uses coercion in its intelligence operations. I find that it 
is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of the United States and the interests of Taiwan. There is no conflict of 
 
7 
 
interest, because he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
strong character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
