 
1 
 
                                 
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
    
     
 
                             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 18-01699 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bradley Moss, Esq. 
05/31/2019 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the guidelines for 
criminal conduct and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines J and E. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 16, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on January 16, 2019. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 6, 2019, scheduling the hearing for March 28, 2019. The hearing was 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented 
three witnesses. Applicant submitted nine exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibit (AX) A 
through I, which were admitted without objection. I held the record open for the final 
exhibit, AE J, which is admitted without objection. The record then closed. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 11, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1 and 2, although he indicated they 
are not consistent with his current character. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Financial 
 
 The SOR alleges in (1.a) under Guideline J, an October 2007 guilty plea to felony 
charges of mail fraud and aiding and abetting and willfully causing an act to be done. It 
further alleges a June 2008 sentencing of 12 months and 1 day of imprisonment and 5 
years of supervised release. Applicant was ordered to pay restitution to his former 
employer in the amount of $913,000. It cross alleges under Guideline E, the same 
information (2.a). Applicant admitted both allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old security engineer for a defense contractor. He is 
married and has three adult children and four grandchildren. He received his 
undergraduate degree in 1975, master’s degree in 1977, and his doctorate in 1990.  His 
doctorate is in artificial intelligence, statistics, and computer science. Applicant has been 
with his current employer since April 2013.  
 
 Applicant began a career in the academic world in approximately 1990. He was a 
lecturer at various universities and worked for a school system, and became the director 
of information systems and instructional technology until 1997.  Because of his great 
success in the school system in implementing technology, he was invited by a board 
member to join the corporate world.  (Tr. 77) 
 
 Applicant accepted a position with a bank and used his impressive skills to 
completely restructure the bank’s information system so that it could efficiently service 
its customers with faster service. He was given six months to accomplish this enormous 
task.  (Tr. 81) He was quite successful in that environment.  
 
 At one point in 1998, he began a “trek down a slippery slope”. He was given 
materials for free and then charged by a contractor for billable hours. He knew this was 
not quite right. (Tr. 93) He stated that he thought it was “kind of fraudulent.”  He stated 
that the environment at the bank presented various opportunities on different levels to 
scam money from the bank. (Tr. 95) He was asked to note things that were not an 
employee expense on invoices. He was asked to set up personal “point of sale 
technology” and charge it to the bank. Applicant saw that a cycle of behavior had begun 
that was not legal. He admits that he should have stopped at that point, and he regrets 
 
3 
 
that he did not. He admits that he had never been tempted like that before. He saw that 
it became easier and easier to continue down the illegal path. (Tr. 98) He began 
receiving gifts in 1998, such as a car for his illegal acts. He continued engaging in 
criminal conduct and in 2002 he learned about “soft dollars.” (Tr. 103) In essence, every 
market trade made on every dollar produced a kickback. (Tr. 104-105) 
 
 Applicant used some of the money that he illegally made to remodel his house or 
help his family. (Tr.108) He felt conflicted about his behavior, but he continued. A shell 
corporation came into existence. At this point Applicant had about $400,000 of money 
that was gained illegally. (Tr. 118)  He did not document the money for tax purposes. He 
knew he was scamming at that point or basically stealing money. (Tr.119) In about late 
2003 or 2004, an investigation occurred and the bank‘s managing partner told Applicant 
if he resigned, he would get six month’s severance pay. (Tr. 124) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant was investigated by the SEC for his misappropriation of funds. 
(GE 3) Applicant pled guilty to the felony charges of mail fraud and aiding and abetting. 
(GE 2) He was sentenced to prison in 2008, as described in the SOR. He had five years 
of supervised release. He was ordered to pay restitution to his former employer in the 
amount of $913,000. (GE 4) 
 
 Applicant completed his sentence without incident. His supervised release was 
terminated in 2011. (AE H) He used his time to help other inmates obtain a GED and he 
became a trusted prisoner. He testified at the hearing that he has no idea why he 
committed the crimes. His mother and father died in part due to his sentencing. He is 
sincerely remorseful and he cannot justify the behavior. (Tr. 134) He tutors children in 
the local community. Applicant received an award from one employer in 2015 for group 
achievement. (AE I) 
 
 Applicant’s probation was decreased from five years to two. He is making 
contributions to his community. He has been paying the restitution. (GE 5)  He has paid 
$250 a month since 2011. He owes about $800,000. (GE 5, AE J) 
 
 Applicant presented three witnesses who testified that he is worthy of a security 
clearance despite the criminal behavior. His current employer stated that he told her 
immediately at the interview about the criminal conviction. She believes he is forthright 
and has valuable technical credentials. (Tr. 18) He has no authority over any funds. In 
his current position. (Tr. 20) A former employee of the bank testified that he worked with 
Applicant from 1999 to 2004. Applicant was a respected boss and empowered his 
employees to accomplish things. There was a memo from the bank that Applicant just 
resigned. (AE F) He was not aware of the criminal behavior that ensured at the bank 
with Applicant. He saw Applicant after his release from prison and saw that he was 
depressed and remorseful. (Tr. 42) This witness has no concerns about future criminal 
behavior on Applicant’s part. (Tr. 46) A third witness testified on Applicant’s behalf, but 
did not know the particulars of the criminal behavior. (Tr. 52)  
 
 Applicant presented six written affidavits from various people who know him as a 
patriot and a good man. His sister and wife attest that he was wrong for what he did but 
 
4 
 
he has paid a dear price. His cousin states that Applicant has turned his life around and 
deserves a chance. A friend who has known Applicant since 2007, and holds a security 
clearance, understands the nature of the criminal activity but believes that Applicant 
would not compromise any sensitive information. A longtime friend of Applicant’s states 
that Applicant is deserving of a second chance. (AE A-E)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 During Applicant’s 2017 investigative interview, he did not disclose his criminal 
behavior, but rather stated that he resigned his job from the bank rather than be fired. 
(GE 4) He also did not disclose that he quit his employment with his bank in his 2005 
security clearance application. (GE 3) After he left the bank, he did not tell anyone about 
his criminal behavior (except his attorneys). Applicant was given a polygraphs in 2005 
and 2006, during which he initially denied criminal involvement with the bank. (GE 3, Tr. 
155) Applicant also failed to disclose his criminal activity to a subsequent employer 
because he feared that he would not get hired. (Tr. 159) In his latest security clearance 
application, he inaccurately stated the reason for leaving the bank. When cross 
examined at the hearing, Applicant explained that he did not read everything correctly 
and that he really did not understand the questions. 
 
 Applicant submitted five letters of recommendation. Each reference from a 
former employer knew Applicant for at least two years and described him as honest with 
a positive attitude. Applicant has exceptional organization and communication skills. He  
is reliable and motivated. One letter of recommendation commended Applicant for his 
ability to encourage students and build self-esteem. He attends church and is a member 
of his church community.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
 
5 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
 
6 
 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.  
 
Applicant was convicted and sentenced for a felony charge in 2007 and 2008. He 
served a year and a day in prison with five years of supervised release. He was ordered 
to pay restitution to his employer in the amount of $913,000. The evidence establishes 
the disqualifying conditions. 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns 
raised in this case: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 While Applicant’s involvement in the above seems to have been an isolated 
event from his work with the bank, the recency and severity of the behavior reduces 
mitigation. He is an educated man and yet from the beginning of his employment and 
for about seven years he engaged in directing false invoices for payment and other 
illegal activities. He does not dispute this. He received a significant amount of illegal 
money and he knew it was wrong but did not stop. He did not tell the bank. He 
completed his sentence, and has sincere remorse for the criminal behavior. He has 
excellent recommendations and affidavits. He works in the community, but given the 
fact that he used incredibly poor judgment for so many years, he has not met his burden 
in this case. His seven year pattern of engaging in illegal behaviors raised significant 
concerns regarding his judgment, discretion, honesty, trustworthiness, and reliability. 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under either of the above conditions. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
 
7 
 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
 (b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
Based on Applicant’s , the following disqualifying condition could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
distress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such 
conduct includes; 
 
(1) Engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the persons’ 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
Applicant admitted the security concerns under personal conduct in his answer to 
the SOR, however he was initially dishonest with security representatives regarding his 
involvement in these activities.  His lack of candor during his investigations and 
polygraphs are noteworthy. He admitted that he did not disclose the full story either in 
writing to his employer or during two investigations.  He is an educated man of 64 years. 
He was involved in fraudulent activities for many years and admits that he knew he 
should have stopped but did not until he was caught.  
 
In this instance, it is clear from Applicant’s testimony that he was initially 
embarrassed and humiliated by his behavior and hoped his crimes would not be 
discovered during his investigation. As a consequence he omitted relevant information 
on three separate occasions. He still owes about $800,000 in restitution. I find 
substantial evidence of concealment of facts from his bank employer and the 
government. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(e) is established. 
 
 Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his concealment.  
He spoke to two investigators and did not reveal the criminal activity until confronted. He 
failed two polygraphs. Applicant has not persuaded me that similar lapses in judgment 
are unlikely to recur.  
 
 AG 17(c) does not apply because the offense is not minor. None of the other 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines J and E, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant on three different occasions failed to disclose that he had a criminal 
conviction for a serious crime. He used incredibly poor judgment for almost seven years 
while he was engaging in the crimes. He has provided some mitigation, but it does not 
outweigh the serious security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct, and 
criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
