 
1 
 
                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
   
             
 
                    
      
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 18-02960 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/13/2019 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s spouse’s connections to her parents who are citizens and residents of 
the People’s Republic of China (China) are close and continuing. China aggressively 
seeks classified and protected information from the United States. Foreign influence 
security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 18, 2016, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit (GE) 1. 
On January 7, 2019, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns 
under Guideline B (foreign influence). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017. (Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2) 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On February 1, 2019, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On February 28, 2019, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On March 4, 2019, the case was assigned to me. On April 5, 2019, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for April 25, 2019. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using 
video teleconference.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered 
four exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 15-18; GE 1-2; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-D) On April 29, 2019, Applicant 
provided 12 exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection. (AE E-AE P) 
On May 3, 2019, the record closed. (Tr. 56) On May 5, 2019, DOHA received a copy of 
the transcript of the hearing. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
China. (Tr. 15-16; HE 4) The request listed supporting documents to show detail and 
context for those facts. Portions of Department Counsel’s AN request are quoted 
without footnotes and quotation marks. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, 
“Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider the country in which the 
foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case necessitates 
administrative notice of facts concerning China.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
The SOR alleges: in ¶ 1.a, that Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of China; in ¶ 1.b, 
that Applicant’s father-in-law is a citizen and resident of China and owns a company in 
China; and in ¶ 1.c, that Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of China. 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, and he provided some clarifications, 
extenuating, and mitigating information. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
                                            
1 To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is a 38-year-old systems engineer employed by a major defense 
contractor since December 2015. (Tr. 6-7) He was born, raised, and educated in the 
United States. (Tr. 25; GE 1) In 1999, he graduated from high school, and in 2003, he 
received a bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. (Tr. 6) In 2006, he earned a 
master’s degree in aerospace engineering. (Tr. 6) Defense contractors have 
sporadically employed him since 2006. (Tr. 25-28) He has not served in the military. (Tr. 
7) 
 
Applicant’s 31-year-old spouse was born in China. (Tr. 31) She received a 
bachelor’s degree in China. (Tr. 31) In 2010, she came to the United States to attend a 
university and obtain a master’s degree in biology. (Tr. 32) She met Applicant in 2012, 
and they married in 2013. (Tr. 7, 33) In 2013, she applied for U.S. permanent residence, 
and in September 2018, she became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 33-34; SOR response) When 
she became a U.S. citizen, she took the Naturalization Oath of Allegiance to the United 
States of America, which states: 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen; 
that I will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United 
States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will 
bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will bear arms on behalf 
of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform 
noncombatant service in the Armed Forces of the United States when 
required by the law; that I will perform work of national importance under 
civilian direction when required by the law; and that I take this obligation 
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me 
God.2 
 
She lost her Chinese citizenship when she became a U.S. citizen.3 Applicant and his 
spouse do not have any children. (Tr. 7, 33) She works in management for a financial 
company. (Tr. 29-30) 
 
                                            
2 The language of the current Oath of Allegiance is found in the Code of Federal Regulations 
Section 337.1 and is closely based upon the statutory elements in Section 337(a) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, 8 U.S.C. § 1448, https://www.uscis.gov/us-
citizenship/naturalization-test/naturalization-oath-allegiance-united-states-america. 
 
3 See China Travel Guide website, Dual Nationality, (stating “China does not recognize dual 
nationality. . . . Article 9 of that law declares that as soon as a Chinese takes a foreign citizenship, he will 
automatically lose his Chinese citizenship.”), https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc= 
s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwiW6N7gkIjiAhXlnuAKHU3BCI8QFjAAegQIAhAB&
url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.travelchinaguide.com%2Fessential%2Fdual-nationality.htm&usg=AOvVaw 
1a29Gix6NFWRpnmqakAw0z. See also U.S. State Department website, U.S. Embassy and Consulates 
in China, (noting “China does not recognize dual nationality” and may not recognize U.S. citizenship for 
someone born in China of Chinese parents), https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q= 
&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwiulo3Ik4jiAhWwneAKHfdLAD0QFjABegQID
BAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fchina.usembassy-china.org.cn%2Fu-s-citizen-services%2Flocal-resources-
of-u-s-citizens%2Finformation-chinese-visas%2F&usg=AOvVaw0BlZbnDmM iXnp0jTh39B3. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of China. 
(Tr. 35-36) His mother-in-law has not worked outside her home for 20 years. (Tr. 35) His 
father-in-law is employed in a senior position for a Chinese Government-owned entity 
that trades in agricultural commodities in China. (Tr. 19-20, 37-39, 55) He does not own 
a company in China. (SOR response) 
 
Applicant has less than monthly frequency of contact with his parents-in-law; 
however, his spouse has almost daily contact with them. (Tr. 43-44) Applicant’s Chinese 
language skills are limited. (Tr. 44-45) Applicant’s parents-in-law intend to move to the 
United States. (Tr. 41-42) In January 2019, Applicant filed the initial application for them 
to immigrate to the United States (Form I-130). (Tr. 42; AE E; AE F) Applicant’s 
spouse’s grandmother lives in China, and she does not intend to move to the United 
States. (Tr. 52, 56) 
 
From September 2012 to April 2019, Applicant and his spouse had in-person 
contact with his parents-in-law ten times over those seven years. (Tr. 45) They had in-
person contact with his father-in-law 103 days (4.3 percent of the total days) and with 
his mother-in-law 163 days (6.7 percent of the total days). (Tr. 20-24, 45-46; AE A) They 
met in the United States, Canada, and China. (AE A) Applicant and his spouse went to 
China in 2014, 2017, and 2019. (Tr. 20-24; AE A) Applicant’s parents-in-law are 
generally aware of Applicant’s employment, and they know he is applying for a security 
clearance. (Tr. 46-47) 
 
Applicant pays federal income taxes, and he and his spouse are financially 
stable. (Tr. 24-25; AE B; AE C) He and his spouse’s total annual income is about 
$210,000. (Tr. 25; AE G; AE H) His net worth is all invested in the United States, mostly 
in stocks, banks, and mutual funds, and totals approximately $300,000 to $400,000. (Tr. 
47-48; AE I-AE P) 
 
Applicant has numerous relatives who live in the United States, including his 
parents, one sibling, and numerous aunts, uncles, and cousins. (Tr. 54; GE 1)  
 
China 
 
China is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is 
the paramount authority. CCP members hold almost all top government and security 
apparatus positions. Chinese leaders are focused on developing the capabilities they 
deem necessary to deter or defeat adversary power projection and counter third-parties 
including the United States in conflicts. China’s military modernization is producing 
capabilities that have the potential to reduce core U.S. military technological 
advantages.  
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to steal secrets.  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Agents of the Chinese Government are the world’s most active and persistent 
perpetrators of economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and 
economic information continue and represent a persistent threat to U.S. economic 
security. The nature of the cyber threat evolves with continuing technological advances 
in the global information environment. 
 
China uses its intelligence services and employs other illicit approaches that 
violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain national security and export-restricted 
technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials unobtainable through legal 
means. Chinese agents have engaged in multiple criminal acts to obtain classified and 
sensitive information. Chinese agents have stolen sensitive military information and 
violated federal export control laws by illegally exporting defense equipment to China. 
China uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection against the U.S. 
diplomatic, economic, and defense industrial base sectors that support U.S. national 
defense programs. The information targeted benefits China’s defense and high-
technology industries and provides insights into U.S. leadership views on China issues. 
Additionally, targeted information informs Chinese military planners about U.S. defense 
networks, logistics, and related military capabilities. 
 
China uses state-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to support military 
research, development, and acquisition. The organizational network of China’s military-
industrial complex is such that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access 
sensitive and dual-use technologies or knowledgeable experts under the guise of 
civilian research and development. 
 
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported that the Chinese government has conducted large-
scale cyber espionage against the United States. China has compromised a range of 
U.S. networks, including those of DOD, defense contractors, and private enterprises. 
China’s substantial and sustained investment in defense research and development 
(R&D) has helped China improve its military-industrial complex. China’s state-
sponsored theft of intellectual property and proprietary information has allowed China to 
fill knowledge gaps in its domestic defense and commercial R&D. 
 
Chinese Government repression and coercion against organizations and 
individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy, and public interest and ethnic 
minority issues occurs. Human rights concerns in China include: repression of speech, 
religion, association, assembly, the press, and movement for certain minorities; 
extrajudicial killings; enforced disappearance and incommunicado detention; torture and 
coerced confessions of prisoners; a lack of due process in judicial proceedings; 
searches of premises without warrants; monitoring of communications (including 
telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet 
communications); and opening of domestic and international mail. Additionally, citizens 
lacked the right to change their government and had limited forms of redress against the 
government.  
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be 
interrogated or detained without information about their alleged crime. Some U.S. 
citizens have been held in China based on an “exit ban” for years. Hotel rooms 
(including meeting rooms), offices, cars, taxis, telephones, Internet usage, and fax 
machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, and personal possessions in hotel 
rooms, including computers, may be searched without knowledge or consent.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in China and educated there through the bachelor’s 
degree level. In 2010, she moved to the United States, and in September 2018, she 
was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. Her parents are citizens and residents of China. She 
has frequent4 contact with her parents. Her father is a senior official employed by a 
Chinese-owned agricultural commodity company.          
 
Applicant lives with and is close to his spouse. His spouse has relatives living in 
China. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 
at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(e). Indirect influence 
from a spouse’s relatives living in China result in a security concern. See ISCR Case 
No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India of close family 
members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its human rights 
abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his spouse) having foreign family 
contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).   
 
Applicant’s spouse’s relationships with citizens and residents of China create a 
concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and 
his desire to help his spouse. For example, if intelligence officials, or other entities in 
China, wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on his 
spouse’s relatives living in China. Applicant would then be subject to coercion through 
his connections to China and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
Applicant’s spouse’s close family ties with her family living in China, are not, as a 
matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his spouse 
has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result 
in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of China with the United States, places a significant, but not an 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his spouse’s 
relationships with her family members living in China do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his spouse’s relatives in 
China. 
  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from China seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his spouse, or her 
relatives living in China, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in 
the future. Applicant’s spouse’s relationships with her family members living in China 
create a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to 
raise a security concern about Applicant’s desire to assist her relatives in China by 
providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence of his spouse’s relationships with her family living in China and has raised the 
issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. Further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant’s spouse has frequent 
contacts with her relatives living in China. There is no evidence that her contracts and 
communications are other than casual and family related; however, Applicant’s in-laws 
in China are aware that Applicant is employed by a defense contractor and is seeking a 
security clearance. Moreover, Applicant has visited China three times in the last five 
years, and Chinese intelligence officials are likely to be aware of those visits. Loyalty to, 
support for, and connections to family are positive character traits. However, for security 
clearance purposes, those same relationships and Applicant’s specialized education 
and background negate the possibility of full mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). 
Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is little likelihood that his 
relationships with relatives in China could create a potential for risk of foreign influence 
or exploitation.   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. Applicant and his spouse are citizens and residents of 
the United States. Applicant has numerous relatives who are citizens and residents of 
the United States, including his parents, one sibling, and numerous aunts, uncles, and 
cousins. He and his spouse’s total annual incomes are about $210,000, and they have 
accumulated substantial financial resources.  
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
China does not recognize dual citizenship, and Applicant’s spouse is solely a 
citizen of the United States. When Applicant’s spouse took the U.S. oath of allegiance 
and when Applicant volunteered to assist the U.S. Government as a contractor, they 
manifested their patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other 
countries. Applicant’s spouse’s parents have expressed their intention to move to the 
United States, and Applicant has filed documents with the U.S. Government manifesting 
that intention. Once they have actually moved to the United States, and her father has 
ended his employment with a Chinese owned company, security concerns will be 
substantially reduced.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his spouse’s relationships with family living in 
China. There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Chinese 
Government, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, 
his spouse, or their relatives living in China to coerce Applicant to provide classified or 
sensitive information.5 As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant, his spouse, 
or her relatives living in China would be specifically selected as targets for improper 
coercion or exploitation. Applicant’s spouse’s relatives living in China could become 
potential targets because Applicant’s potential access to classified information could 
theoretically add some risk to them from intelligence elements in China. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic connections to China.  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(d), 8(e), and 8(f) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not 
encouraged Applicant’s involvement with anyone living in China. Applicant is not 
required to report his contacts with citizens or residents of China. Applicant does not 
have significant assets in China, and his assets in the United States do not mitigate 
security concerns. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s spouse’s connections to her relatives living in China are close 
and raise a security concern. Her parents are citizens and residents of China. 
Applicant’s spouse has frequent contact with them. Applicant and his spouse had in-
person contact with them 10 times in the previous 7 years. Applicant and his spouse 
traveled to China three times in the past five years. Applicant and his spouse have 
significant connections to the United States; however, they are not sufficient to 
overcome his spouse’s connections to China. Foreign influence security concerns are 
not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
                                            
5 There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration” of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old systems engineer employed by a major defense 
contractor since December 2015. He was born, raised, and educated in the United 
States. In 2006, he earned a master’s degree in aerospace engineering. Defense 
contractors have sporadically employed him since 2006. Applicant has numerous 
relatives who are citizens and residents of the United States. He and his spouse have 
excellent annual incomes that total about $210,000, and they have accumulated 
substantial financial resources. Applicant was a credible, intelligent witness that clearly 
wants to do what is best for national security. I have no doubt that he is completely loyal 
to the United States.  
 
Applicant through his spouse has significant connections to China. His spouse 
was born in China and educated through the bachelor’s degree level in China. In 2010, 
she moved from China to the United States, and she was naturalized as a U.S. citizen 
in 2018. Her parents are citizens and residents of China, and she has frequent contact 
with her parents. Applicant and his spouse have visited China three times in the last five 
years. Applicant’s parents-in-law know he is a highly educated engineer with a security 
clearance. Chinese intelligence officials are likely to be aware of Applicant because of 
his visits to China.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017) the Appeal Board 
considered a Guideline B case involving a U.S. citizen with family members in China 
and commented: 
 
In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved 
and the intelligence gathering history of that government are among the 
important considerations that provide context for the other record evidence 
and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the 
case. The country’s human rights record is another important 
consideration. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
2007); ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006). There is a 
rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose 
interests are adverse to the United States and the risk that the applicant 
might fail to protect and safeguard classified information. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 10-07436 at 3, n. 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2011). 
 
We note record evidence and the Judge’s findings of the following: 
Applicant’s parents reside in China; Applicant communicates with them 
frequently; Applicant has visited them or they her on a regular basis; 
Applicant’s parents are aware of the location and general nature of her 
work; China practices espionage against the U.S.; and China has used its 
cyber-espionage capability to compromise DOD and contractor computer 
systems. This evidence supports the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s 
parents could become a means through which Applicant could come to 
the attention of Chinese intelligence personnel and be subjected to 
coercion or pressure.  
 
There are some factual differences between Applicant’s case, and ISCR Case 
No. 15-00528 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017); however, the issues of security concern in that 
case and Applicant’s case are similar. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00042 (App. Bd. 
July 6, 2016) (denial of security clearance due to connections to China affirmed); ISCR 
Case No. 14-03200 (App. Bd. July 16, 2015) (same); ISCR Case No. 12-04780 at 3 
(App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013) (stating “The PRC’s history of conducting espionage against 
the United States puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant that he was unable to meet 
because of his ties to his relatives who are PRC citizens and residents.”). 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c: Against Applicant 
 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
