1 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS   
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 18-01313 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Krista Wallace, Esq. 
05/22/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
The allegations against Applicant were unsubstantiated. Clearance is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline K, handling protected information, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct, explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive) and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
In an undated answer, Applicant denied the allegations and requested a hearing. On 
November 21, 2018, Department Counsel amended the SOR , adding a paragraph, 
alleging Guideline E, personal conduct, amending subparagraph 1.b by making it 
subparagraph 2.a, and cross-alleging 1.a as subparagraph 2.b to include the alleged 
 
2 
 
misconduct under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
On January 16, 2019, the case was assigned to me, after having been transferred 
from another administrative judge. On February 12, 2019, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals issued a notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s case for March 11, 2019. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. I received four Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 4), 
four Applicant exhibits (AE A - AE D), and a copy of the discovery letter from Department 
Counsel to Applicant, dated November 21, 2018. Also, I considered the testimony of 
Applicant and three character witnesses. Another witness who was at the hearing and 
prepared to testify had to leave early, prompting Applicant’s counsel to request that the 
record be kept open for a week to submit a character letter. Department Counsel did not 
object, and I left the record open. Within the time allotted, Applicant’s counsel submitted a 
reference letter from the witness who had to leave the hearing early, and I incorporated the 
letter into the record as AE E. The transcript was received on March 27, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old single woman. Since 2012, she has worked as a security 
assistant for various federal contractors. (GE 1 at 9-24) According to her current 
supervisor, with whom she has worked since July 2016, she is a conscientious worker who 
comes to work on time and on a regular basis. Moreover, her integrity is “beyond 
reproach,” and she has the strongest work ethic of any of his subordinates. (Tr. 52-53) A 
former coworker characterized Applicant as “a very professional, funny, caring, and 
conscious professional,” who was well-liked by the team, and who always ensured that 
each member of the team participated in each team-building activity. (Answer at 6)  
Another coworker, who worked with Applicant from approximately July 2016 to July 2018, 
characterized her as “dependable, real self-motivated, and loyal.” (Tr. 60) 
 
 Applicant was granted a security clearance in 2012. (GE 1 at 41) It was suspended 
in 2016, pending the outcome of this security clearance decision. (GE 3 at 2) 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.a alleges that in December 2015, during an interview with a 
panel of employees from a contracting firm, Applicant disclosed that she kept access code 
combinations written down on a piece of paper in her possession while working for her 
then-employer, between October and November 2015, and that she verbally disclosed 
access code combinations. Applicant acknowledges that she underwent an interview in 
December 2015, and that she discussed the security procedure for opening the Sensitive 
Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) where she was then working. (Tr. 24) However, 
she denies that she either failed to follow security procedures when she worked in the 
SCIF, or that she disclosed access combinations during the interview. Specifically, she 
testified that the SCIF where she worked could be entered with security cards. Before the 
security cards could operate, the agency’s security specialist,1 as the first person who 
arrived each morning, had to open it by unlocking each of the three successive doors that 
led to the SCIF. (Tr. 37) After this task was performed, the SCIF was accessible by security 
cards for the remainder of the day. (Tr. 39-40) 
                                                 
1 Applicant was working onsite at a federal government agency. (Answer at 7) 
3 
 
 
 One day, the security specialist asked Applicant to open the SCIF the following 
morning. He issued Applicant the code to a secured cabinet, which Applicant used to open 
the cabinet lock and retrieve an envelope with three combinations enclosed for the 
successive doors. (Tr. 25) To aid her memory, Applicant wrote the combinations to the 
successive doors on a sheet of paper. (GE 4 at 3) After opening each successive door and 
getting to her desk, which was located in the SCIF, she tore up the paper and placed it in 
her burn bag. (Tr. 46) The paper that contained the combinations was never out of 
Applicant’s possession when she was referring to it to open the combinations. (Tr. 25) 
 
 Applicant never performed morning SCIF-opening duty again. (Tr. 25) There is 
conflicting record information concerning whether writing down security access codes 
constituted a security infraction.  She contends that writing down the codes for the security 
doors, then tearing them up and disposing them in a burn bag was not a security infraction. 
(Tr. 32) A character witness testified that it constituted a security infraction to write down a 
combination to a classified cabinet. (Tr. 67)  There is no record evidence of a company rule 
or procedure that addresses this issue.  
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.b alleges that Applicant told the interview panel at the 
December 2015 interview, that she hears voices in her head. Applicant denies this 
allegation. (Answer; Tr. 29) She has never heard imaginary voices or been diagnosed with 
a psychiatric condition, nor has she ever sought treatment or been hospitalized for a 
psychiatric condition. (Tr. 29) After Applicant learned of the allegation set forth in 
subparagraph 1.b, she contacted the head of the panel that interviewed her in 2015. The 
panel chairwoman denied making this allegation. (GE 4 at 3) 
  
 Applicant has been receiving medical services from a primary care provider since 
2012. (Tr. 30) According to a nurse practitioner from the practice, Applicant is not being 
treated for any psychiatric conditions. (AE D) Per a friend who has known Applicant for 20 
years, she has never displayed any symptoms of a psychiatric condition. (Tr. 57) Similarly, 
a coworker who worked with Applicant in 2012 noticed no symptoms indicative of a 
psychiatric condition. (Tr. 64) 
 
 The allegations that form the basis of the SOR were reported to the Defense 
Security Service (DSS) by the facility security officer of the company where Applicant 
interviewed, on December 21, 2015, three days after the interview occurred. (GE 3) On 
March 15, 2016, DSS suspended Applicant’s security clearance. (GE 3 at 2)  
 
 The DSS report does not identify the individuals who made the adverse statements. 
It also incorrectly states Applicant’s place of employment at the time of the interview. (Tr. 
19)  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied together with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K: Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concerns about handing protected information are set forth in AG ¶ 13: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information – which includes classified and other sensitive 
government information, and proprietary information – raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to 
safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 Applicant wrote access code combinations on a piece of paper, which she used to 
aid her memory, as she opened three doors to a SCIF, on one occasion seven years ago, 
while working for a former employer. Her recollection of whether writing down a 
combination to a classified safe constitutes a security infraction conflicted with the 
recollection of a former coworker, who testified that such conduct would constitute a 
security infraction. However, there is no record evidence of an express company rule or 
procedure rule prohibiting this conduct. Absent record evidence of such a rule or 
procedure, I conclude that Applicant’s conduct does not constitute a mishandling of 
protected information. Assuming, for the sake of argument, that Applicant’s conduct 
constituted a security infraction, triggering AG ¶ 34(g),3 the length of time since it elapsed, 
and its isolated nature, trigger the application of AG ¶ 35(a).4 
  
 The allegation that Applicant disclosed the access codes at an interview is based on 
GE 2, a DSS Suspicious Contact Report. No one is identified in the report.  The probative 
value of the report is further limited as it contains the wrong city for where Applicant was 
working when the 2012 episode with the security access codes occurred. Upon weighing 
this report against Applicant’s denial and the positive record evidence of her integrity – 
particularly, the character reference of her current supervisor - I conclude that the 
allegation that Applicant disclosed the access codes at her interview is unsubstantiated. In 
sum, I conclude that there are no Guideline K security concerns. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
3 Any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive information. 
 
4 So much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
6 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s conduct, as cross-alleged In SOR subparagraphs 1.a 
and 2.b, was unsubstantiated. Consequently, it generates no security concern under either 
the guideline governing the mishandling of protected information, or the personal conduct 
guideline. 
 
  The allegation that Applicant hears imaginary voices, if true, would trigger the 
application of AG ¶ 16(d)(1), “untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . .”, and AG ¶ 16(e), 
“personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other 
individual or group.” Applicant denies this allegation. The credibility of her denial is 
bolstered by the record evidence of her good job performance and strong character. 
 
 The allegation that Applicant disclosed hearing imaginary voices to an interview 
panel is encapsulated in a DSS report that neither identifies the members of the interview 
panel, nor indicates which of the members of the interview panel made the allegation. The 
only member of the interview panel identified in the record denied making this allegation 
when contacted by Applicant. The DSS report also misstates Applicant’s place of 
employment when the interview occurred. Upon weighing this adverse information report 
against the positive record evidence, I conclude that the SOR allegations contained within 
it are unsubstantiated. There are no personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 In weighing Applicant’s credibility, I considered her strong work ethic, sterling 
reputation, and integrity.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:      WITHDRAWN 
` 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
 Administrative Judge 
