 
1 
 
 
                               
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
  
   
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02185 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
                               
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/28/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 5, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 25, 2019. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 13, 
2019. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 19, 2019. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. There 
were no objections to any of the exhibits offered, and they were admitted into evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript on April 30, 2019.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq. Applicant did not object, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported by source 
documents from official U.S. Government publications.1 The facts are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c and denied 1.d 
and 1.e. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He was born in Iraq and graduated from high school 
there in 1989. He was conscripted into the Iraqi Army and went through basic training. He 
had an option to work in a factory for ten years instead of military service. He chose to 
work in the factory and did so until he fled to Jordan in 1998. He worked there for a year 
before returning to Iraq in 1999. He testified that he paid a bribe to be released from his 
factory contract. He was then self-employed.2  
 
Applicant married in 2002. He has three children, ages 16, 14 and 11, who were 
all born in Iraq. From 2003 to 2006, he worked for the United States Government in Iraq. 
From 2007 to 2010, he worked as an interpreter for United States military forces in Iraq. 
He served with the forces until there was a drawdown, and he was laid off.3 
 
Applicant provided letters of recommendations from some of the U.S. military 
personnel with whom he served in Iraq from 2007 to 2010. He was praised for his service 
and guidance on cultural matters. It was noted he was dedicated to his duty and 
completely devoted to the mission of securing and rebuilding Iraq. He was excellent at 
his job and a consummate professional. The letters also reflected that Applicant 
participated in daily patrols in high threat areas and combat operations, which put him 
considerable risk to his safety and security. He was responsible for tactical questioning 
of suspected insurgents and translation of confiscated documents. He assisted 
immeasurably in communication with the Iraqi local nationals and Iraqi Security Forces. 
                                                          
1 Source documents are attached to Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Tr. 18-22; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. 18-22, 73-79. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Despite these constant threats, he served the U.S. forces with distinction.4 One of the 
letters stated the following:  
 
[Applicant] was an invaluable asset to 1st Platoon during his three-month 
tenure. He enabled the successful conduct of over 150 combat operations 
in [city] and [city] Iraq. His mastery of the English language and 
understanding of the local dialect, customs, and idioms provided a 
seamless link between Coalition Forces and the local populace, supporting 
both combat and stability operations. Furthermore, his ability to translate 
the United States Army’s technical jargon into terms Iraqi Security Forces 
could understand was essential for rapid commands on the battlefield.  
 
[Applicant] has an unparalleled work ethic. The difficult missions and long 
hours involved in translating for a United States Army Infantry platoon 
demand only strong, skilled, responsible men. [Applicant] is a prime 
example of such a man.5 
 
In 2010, Applicant and his family immigrated to the United States as refugees. 
Applicant had applied for a Special Immigration Visa (SIV) because of his service to the 
United States Government. He had already immigrated and was living in the United 
States with his family when an SIV was approved, so he chose to not change his 
immigration status. He attempted to enlist in the American military because he liked 
working with them. He was told he was too old. In July 2016, he became a naturalized 
citizen of the United States. He testified that after he became a U.S. citizen, he applied to 
work as a linguist Iraq.6  
 
Applicant’s father passed away in 2006. Applicant returned to Iraq to visit his 
mother in 2012, 2014, and 2018. Applicant maintains close contact with his mother, and 
speaks with her by phone regularly. He does not know her exact age, but she is at least 
in her 90s. He has three sisters. His mother lives with two of his sisters and two nephews. 
Applicant communicates with them when he calls his mother. One sister is single and the 
other is a widow. His single sister works as a technician. His widowed sister works in a 
factory. His mother and two sisters are citizens and residents of Iraq. His widowed sister 
has two sons, one who is a severely handicapped teenager. They both live with her. His 
nephew contacts Applicant regularly due to the isolation caused by his disability. 
Applicant’s third sister is also a widow who has six children. Applicant was unsure if any 
of them live with her, but thought perhaps one did. She is a citizen and resident of Iraq 
and supports herself with her husband’s pension. He last saw her in 2014 and has 
occasional social media contact.7 
                                                          
4 Tr. 80. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
6 Tr. 22-27, 79-80; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. 27-33, 41-48; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has two brothers, one is a permanent resident of the United States and 
the other is a citizen and resident of Iraq. Applicant sponsored his brother, his brother’s 
wife and their one minor child for immigration to the United States. Their other children 
were over 18 years old and remained in Iraq. Applicant’s brother’s wife is also a 
permanent resident. Applicant’s other brother is married with children. He is a citizen and 
resident of Iraq. He is a tailor. Applicant sometimes communicates with him through social 
media. Applicant visited him during his last visit to Iraq in 2018, but had not seen him for 
many years before that.8  
 
Applicant’s wife’s parents are citizens and residents of Iraq. She contacts them 
regularly. She has returned to Iraq twice to visit, once with the children. She works in a 
restaurant. She sends her parents money. Her father is not employed. In about 2013, 
Applicant’s wife’s brother died from an improvised explosive device. He was in the Iraqi 
Army, but was not on duty at the time. Her father receives the brother’s pension. She also 
has another brother and three sisters who are citizens and residents of Iraq. His wife 
intends to visit her family in Iraq in the future.9  
 
Applicant testified that he has a big family and most of his contact with them is 
through social media and consists of a casual greeting. He believes some of his relatives 
are jealous that he is now an American citizen. He has told them to stop contacting him 
on social media. He does not have anything in common with them anymore. Applicant 
has many nieces, nephews, and cousins. He disclosed that one of his nephews is a police 
officer with the Iraqi National Police. Another nephew works with the Iraqi public works 
department. He did not know his specific job. They are all citizens and residents of Iraq. 
He contacted some of his relatives when he was completing the security clearance 
documents so he could obtain accurate information. Some were aware he was applying 
for a job with the United States Government, but not the specific job, or that he may be 
returning to Iraq.10  
 
In 2010, before Applicant immigrated to the United States, he sold a house that 
was co-owned by family members. The proceeds were split among the siblings. His 
mother and two sisters wanted to purchase another house. Before Applicant’s father 
passed away, he told Applicant to take care of his mother and sisters. Applicant took his 
share of the profit he earned on the sale of the house, which was $22,000, and loaned 
them $18,000, so they could purchase the new house. They put his name on the deed of 
the house. They intended to repay him, but Applicant knows they are unable to repay him 
and he considers it a gift to them. He asked them to sell the house so his name could be 
removed from the deed or to take his name off the deed, so it would not cause 
complication. They do not want to sell the house because they need stability for the 
handicapped teen. Applicant testified that he financially helps his sisters and mother if 
                                                          
8 Tr. 33-41; GE 1, 2. 
 
9 Tr. 48-54; GE 1, 2. 
 
10 Tr. 54-60, 84-85; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 
they need it. He said that he has applied for his one sister and two nephews to immigrate 
to the United States.11  
 
In 2013, Applicant purchased a house in the United States, which cost about 
$94,000. He owns two vehicles. He has a checking and savings account in the United 
States with assets of about $10,000. He had a bank account in Iraq, but it was dormant 
for more than five years and was closed by the bank. He stated that his life is in the United 
States. He considers the United States his country and is not loyal to any other.12 
 
IRAQ 
 
 The United States Department of State warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq remain at 
high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence and to avoid all travel to Iraq. The ability of 
the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens outside Baghdad is 
extremely limited given the security environment. ISIS controls a significant portion of 
Iraq’s territory. Within areas under ISIS control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability 
to control and ensure public safety. 
 
 Numerous terrorist and insurgent groups are active in Iraq, including ISIS. Such 
groups regularly attack both Iraqi security forces and civilians. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may also threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. U.S. 
Government and western interests remain possible targets for attacks.  
 
 The U.S. Government considers the potential personal security threats to U.S. 
government personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live and work under 
strict security guidelines.  
 
 There are significant human rights problems in Iraq to include: sectarian hostility, 
widespread corruption, lack of transparency at all levels of government and society that 
have weakened the government’s authority and worsened effective human rights 
protections. Iraqi security forces and members of the Federal Police have committed 
human rights violations to include killing, kidnapping, and extorting civilians. There are 
also problems that include harsh and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison 
facilities, arbitrary arrest and lengthy pretrial detainment, denial of fair public trial, limits 
on freedom of expression, freedom of the press, censorship of religion, limits on peaceful 
assembly, and societal abuses of women. ISIS is also responsible for human rights 
abuses. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
11 Tr. 61-66. 
 
12 Tr. 66-71. 
 
6 
 
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
 
7 
 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(e), and 7(f) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” necessary to raise these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie 
must be considered.  
 
Applicant’s mother, brother, three sisters, and his wife’s parents are citizens and 
residents of Iraq. He has other extended family members who are also citizens and 
residents of Iraq. Applicant has ties of affection to many of them. He maintains regular 
contact with his mother and his two sisters who live with her and his nephews. He has 
 
8 
 
 
infrequent contact with other relatives. Applicant’s family residing in Iraq creates a 
heightened risk and a potential foreign influence concern.  
 
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to Iraq 
because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. 
citizens. It also has serious concerns about terrorist activities in Iraq that specifically target 
Americans. There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Iraq because of 
terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has supported the U.S. Government through his work 
as a translator and linguist and is willing to do so in the future. Numerous linguists, 
translators and advisors supporting U.S. forces, have families living in Iraq. Thousands 
of the U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Iraq are targets 
of terrorists, along with Iraqi civilians, who support the Iraq Government and cooperate 
with coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person, who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government; the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties; a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government; the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage; or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Iraq with the United States, and 
the situation in Iraq place a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Iraq do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be 
forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a relative 
living in Iraq.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Iraq seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family, 
nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. International 
terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable state 
intelligence services, and Iraq has an enormous problem with terrorism. Applicant’s 
relationships with relatives living in Iraq create a potential conflict of interest because 
terrorists could place pressure on his family living there in an effort to cause Applicant to 
compromise classified information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Substantial 
evidence was produced of Applicant’s contacts with family in Iraq and has raised the issue 
of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply.  
 
9 
 
 
Applicant owns a shared interest in a house where his mother and two sisters live. 
He loaned them money, and they put his name on the deed of the house. They are unable 
to repay the loan. He considered the loan a gift and does not expect repayment. Based 
on Applicant’s financial interests and ties in the United States, I find his financial interest 
in the house nominal and does not raise a heightened risk of foreign influence or create 
a personal conflict of interest. I find AG ¶ 7(f) does not apply. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s mother, brother, sisters, parents-in-law and other relatives are citizens 
and residents of Iraq. He maintains a close relationship with some of them and not others. 
He talks with his mother regularly and often with his sisters and nephews living with her. 
He has visited them in past years. He has had infrequent visits with relatives and talks to 
them infrequently during the year. Applicant’s contact with his family is infrequent, but not 
casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant worked for the United 
States Government from 2003 to 2006. He then served on dangerous missions and 
combat operations with U.S. military forces from 2007 to 2010. He immigrated to the 
United States and was subsequently granted an SIV after he arrived. In 2017, he applied 
for a job to return to serve with U.S. military forces in Iraq. Applicant became a U.S. 
citizen, bought a home, and lives in the United States with his immediate family. He has 
financial assets in the United States. His brother and family also live in the United States. 
 
Applicant’s years of supporting the United States military in Iraq as a linguist, 
including the dangers that service entailed, weigh heavily toward mitigating security 
concerns. He hopes to continue to support the United States’ goals in Iraq. He is loyal 
and committed to the United States. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and resident of Iraq. Like every other resident of Iraq, any of his relatives who may be 
living in Iraq are at risk from terrorists. 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant has one brother who is a tailor in Iraq. He has infrequent contact with 
him. He has two nephews who have contacts with government entities in Iraq. One is in 
the police force and another works with a ministry department. He has ongoing contact 
with his mother, two sisters, and two nephews. He has limited contact with other relatives. 
His wife has regular contact with her parents in Iraq. I have considered all of these 
contacts. In doing so, it is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment 
of manpower and money in Iraq, and Applicant’s support for the U.S. goals and objectives 
in Iraq. Applicant and his family living in Iraq are potential targets of terrorists, and 
Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add risk to his 
relatives living in Iraq from lawless elements in Iraq.  
 
Applicant’s possible future connections to his relatives living in Iraq are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, financial interests and bonds to the United States, performance as a 
linguist to U.S. forces, and U.S. citizenship are important factors weighing toward 
mitigation of security concerns. Based on Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationship, 
and proven loyalty to the United States, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. His connections to the United States taken together 
are sufficient to fully overcome and mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under 
Guideline B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant worked for the United States Government in Iraq from 2003 to 2006. He 
then served as a linguist from 2007 to 2010, actively supporting the U.S. military mission 
in Iraq in dangerous operations. He understands the risks associated with having family 
in Iraq. Based on Applicant’s past commitment and service under combat and hostile 
conditions and his demonstrated continued loyalty to the United States, he has mitigated 
the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
