 
1 
 
 
                                
                       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
     
           
             
 
                              
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02272 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/08/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 17, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2019, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 15, 2019. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 12, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 16, 2019. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6.1 Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. There were 
no objections and GE 1 through 6 were admitted into evidence. The record remained 
opened until May 2, 2019, to permit Applicant an opportunity to provide documents. He 
did not provide any documents and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on April 26, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and admitted the allegation 
in ¶ 1.c. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He served on active duty in the military from 1991 until 
he retired honorably in 2011. He married in 1993 and has a grown daughter. He divorced 
in 1998. He remarried in 1999 and divorced in 2011. There were no children from this 
marriage. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2011.2 
 
 Applicant and his first wife filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1994 and their debts were 
discharged the same year. Applicant and his second wife filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
August 2000. It was converted to Chapter 7 in 2002, and their debts were discharged in 
2003. In 2005, Applicant and his wife purchased a house and secured two mortgages. 
Applicant claimed his wife had a spending problem. While he worked overseas, he would 
return home and would notice large purchases had been made.3  
 
 In August 2007, Applicant and his wife filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which included 
a payment plan for the two mortgages (SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($77,623) and 1.b ($22,768)) that 
were in arrears. They did not complete the terms of the Chapter 13 bankruptcy because 
they filed for divorce. The divorce decree terms stated that Applicant would make the 
mortgage payments through September 2011. His wife was granted exclusive possession 
of the house until their bankruptcy discharge or she refinanced it by May 2014. If the wife 
could not refinance the mortgages or was 30 days or more late on a payment, then the 
house would be sold and the proceeds of the sale were to be split. Applicant would be 
responsible for the mortgage payments during the pendency of the sale of the house or 
if the wife refinanced the home by May 1, 2014. The Chapter 13 bankruptcy was 
dismissed in November 2011 for failure to make payments.4  
 
 Applicant’s testimony was he had no idea when his wife moved out of the house. 
He said the house was sold, but he had no idea when or the amount it was sold for. He 
said after his divorce, his ex-wife filed bankruptcy. His understanding was the debts in 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a demonstrative exhibit.  
 
2 Tr. 17-20, 24; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 20-23; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. 25; GE 2, 5, 6. 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were charged off. He believed that meant they were gone. He said 
he now understands the mortgages or a portion were not paid. When asked if he had any 
intention of paying the debts, he stated “Probably not, Your Honor. It’s a lot of money.”5 
He said his ex-wife surrendered the house in her bankruptcy, and the debts were charged 
off. He said he reached out to the creditors in 2012 regarding keeping the house, but they 
were unwilling to work with him because of his ex-wife’s bankruptcy. He was aware in 
2012 that the debts were on his credit report. Applicant never followed up on the status 
of the two mortgages or his financial responsibility to the creditors.6 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in August 2016. In it 
he disclosed the mortgage debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He stated that the house was 
awarded in his divorce to his ex-wife with a contingency that she refinance it in her name. 
He said she subsequently filed bankruptcy and surrendered the property. He was 
attempting to remove the debt from his credit report. He did not provide evidence of what 
he did.7  
 
 During Applicant’s March 2018 background investigation, he told the government 
investigator that his ex-wife was supposed to pay for the mortgages, but she defaulted on 
the loans. He said the loans were in both of their names. He was given time by the 
investigator to produce documents regarding his Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but did not.8  
 
 During Applicant’s background interview, he was confronted with the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.c. He told the investigator that this was an energy bill. He said he checks his credit 
report once a week, and this debt was not on it. He was given time to produce supporting 
documentation to the investigator and did not. He said he would inquire about the account. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debt in ¶ 1.c. At this hearing, he denied 
the debt and said he was contesting it.9  
 
 A credit report from October 2016 reports the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a as charged off in 
December 2013. It reports the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b as past due in the amount of $1,915. A 
credit report from June 2018 reports the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a as charged off and the debt in 
¶ 1.b as in collection.10 
 
 Applicant was provided an opportunity to provide documents to show the current 
status of the mortgage debts and whether he owed any deficiency. He did not provide 
                                                          
5 Tr. 26. 
 
6 Tr. 23, 25-37. 
 
7 Tr. 28-37; GE 1. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 41-43; GE 2. 
 
10 GE 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
 
any information. He did not provide any documents to dispute the debts in the SOR or 
proof of payment.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                          
11 Tr. 42-44. 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accruing in about 2013. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
6 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant defaulted on two debts associated with mortgages he and his wife 
obtained to purchase a house in 2005. They went through a divorce and the decree 
detailed how the house would be dealt with. Applicant’s testimony was that he believed 
that when a debt was charged off he was no longer responsible for it. The debt in SOR ¶ 
1.a was charged off. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is in collection. He told the government 
investigator he was going to get one of the debts removed from his credit report. He did 
not provide evidence of any action he took to determine the current status of these debts. 
It is unknown if there was a deficiency or if the mortgages were satisfied through his ex-
wife’s bankruptcy or when the house sold. Both debts remain on his credit report. He 
admitted and then denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. The record was held open to allow him 
to provide substantiating evidence that he is no longer responsible for any of the debts. 
He failed to do so. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the current status or resolution 
was not provided.  
 
 Applicant’s divorce was beyond his control. For the application of AG ¶ 20(b) he 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to do so. His divorce 
decree detailed his responsibility regarding the house. Applicant did not provide evidence 
of his actions or that he acted responsibly. Despite owning the house jointly, he did not 
follow up on his financial obligation toward the mortgages they secured after his ex-wife’s 
bankruptcy or after the house sold. Applicant indicated he would contact the creditor in 
SOR ¶ 1.c during his background interview, but failed to provide evidence of his actions 
to resolve this debt. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d). There is 
no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling or has made a good-faith effort 
to repay the overdue creditors. Applicant was confronted with the relatively small debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c during his background interview. He was going to contact the creditor to 
resolve it. He admitted the debt in answer to the SOR, but denied it at his hearing. He did 
 
7 
 
 
not provide evidence that he has disputed or resolved this debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He served in the military and retired honorably. He has 
a history of financial problems beginning when his debts were discharged in Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 1994 and again in 2002. He then filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007, but 
it was not completed because he and his wife filed for divorce. Their mortgage debts were 
included in the divorce decree. Applicant failed to follow up on his responsibilities 
associated with the debts after his ex-wife filed bankruptcy. He was provided an 
opportunity to produce evidence to corroborate that he is no longer responsible for any of 
the debts alleged. He may not be responsible for one or both of the mortgages, but he 
failed to provide evidence to make this determination. He also failed to provide evidence 
that he disputed or paid the small debt alleged. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
