 
1 
 
                                  
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
     
       
           
             
 
                            
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01484 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark A. Myers, Esq. 
05/22/2019 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the psychological conditions security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline I, 
psychological conditions. Applicant responded to the SOR on December 3, 2018, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
March 4, 2019.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 11, 2019, scheduling the hearing for May 8, 2019. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, which 
were admitted without objection. On May 15, 2019, I proposed to the parties that this 
case was appropriate for a summary disposition in Applicant’s favor. Department 
Counsel objected. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has an 
associate’s degree and additional college credits. She is married, but separated, with 
three children.  
 
Applicant has had minor employment, financial, interpersonal, and legal issues, 
none of which were significant enough to be a security concern. She went to a new 
doctor in December 2014, but she did not like how she was treated, and she left shortly 
after she arrived for her first visit. She filed a complaint against the doctor. The doctor 
was apparently interviewed for Applicant’s background investigation and provided 
derogatory information, which spurred the DOD to request a psychological evaluation. 
 
Applicant was evaluated at the DOD’s request by a licensed clinical psychologist 
on January 24, 2018. The report of the evaluation was completed on February 2, 2018. 
The psychologist diagnosed Applicant with “Histrionic, borderline, and narcissistic 
personality traits (Cluster B).” The psychologist wrote that Applicant “does not endorse 
or display obvious symptoms of mood disorder at this time . . . . She does display 
obvious signs of a characterological disorder . . . .” The psychologist also wrote: 
 
Among the problematic issues that can arise in individuals with Cluster B 
personality traits are lack of empathy, irresponsibility and selfish 
behaviors, unprovoked aggressive outbursts that can be verbal and/or 
physical in nature, and many other inappropriate behavior (e.g., behaving 
in provocative or attention seeking ways). 
 
The psychologist questioned Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, and 
opined that “[g]iven the longstanding legal, occupational, and family difficulties in this 
case, and her lack of insight or interest in treatment, the prognosis for this applicant is 
poor.” 
 
Applicant presented a letter from her treating physician whose medical opinion is 
that Applicant “is mentally well.” She also presented an evaluation from a licensed 
clinical social worker (LCSW) who found no diagnosis and that Applicant “does not 
present with the ‘Cluster B’ Personality Disorders, nor does she present with any 
emotional, mental and personality condition that impair[s] her judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness.” Applicant also presented substantial character evidence attesting to 
her excellent job performance, emotional stability, honesty, dedication, loyalty, work 
ethic, and integrity. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I: Psychological Conditions 
 
 
The security concern for psychological conditions is set out in AG ¶ 27: 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline and an opinion, including 
prognosis, should be sought. No negative inference concerning the 
standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the basis of mental 
health counseling. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 28. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.  
 
The psychologist diagnosed Applicant with “Histrionic, borderline, and narcissistic 
personality traits (Cluster B),” and reported that problematic issues can arise in 
individuals with those personality traits. The psychologist also questioned Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
In order to establish AG ¶ 28(b), there must be both an opinion that the individual 
has a condition and that the condition may impair judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness. There are some issues with both prongs. I note that Applicant was 
never diagnosed with a personality disorder; it was the psychologist’s opinion that she 
exhibited certain personality traits. The psychologist presumably utilized the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), which provides: 
 
Personality traits are enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and 
thinking about the environment and oneself that are exhibited in a wide 
range of social and personal contexts. Only when personality traits are 
inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant functional impairment or 
subjective distress do they constitute personality disorders. 
 
There is some question whether personality traits that do not rise to the level of a 
personality disorder constitute a “condition.” In that regard, the DSM 5 addresses 
narcissistic personality traits: 
 
 
5 
 
Many highly successful individuals display personality traits that might be 
considered narcissistic. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, 
and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective 
distress do they constitute narcissistic personality disorder. 
 
The DSM similarly warns about histrionic personality traits: 
 
Many individuals may display histrionic personality traits. Only when these 
traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant 
functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute histrionic 
personality disorder. 
 
 There is also the question whether those personality traits “impair judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness” (emphasis added), or an individual’s behavior, which may 
reflect poor judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness, is utilized to establish that the 
individual has personality traits. In that regard, it is not completely clear whether the 
psychologist rendered her opinion about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness based on Applicant’s psychological condition or on her behavior. In spite 
of the identified issues, the totality of the evaluation is sufficient to raise concerns under 
AG ¶ 28(b). 
 
AG ¶ 29 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(d) the past psychological/psychiatric condition was temporary, the 
situation has been resolved, and the individual no longer shows 
indications of emotional instability; and  
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
 
Applicant presented a letter from her treating physician whose medical opinion is 
that Applicant “is mentally well.” She also presented an evaluation from an LCSW who 
found no diagnosis and that Applicant “does not present with the ‘Cluster B’ Personality 
Disorders, nor does she present with any emotional, mental and personality condition 
that impair[s] her judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.” Applicant also presented 
substantial character evidence. I am satisfied that Applicant possesses the judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness required for a security clearance holder. I conclude that 
any security concerns raised under AG ¶ 28(b) are mitigated under AG ¶¶ 29(d) and 
29(e).   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline I in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the psychological conditions security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
