 
1 
 
                                
                       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
    
             
 
 
                              
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00811 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jan Lauver, Esq. 
05/15/2019 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2018, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on February 28, 2019, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on March 8, 2019. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
(AE) A though C, which were admitted without objection. The record was kept open until 
April 30, 2019, and Applicant submitted AE D through H, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 5, 2019.  
 
Procedural Issue 
  
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR at hearing to add an additional 
allegation under Guideline F. Applicant was given the choice to proceed to hearing with 
the amended allegation or request a continuance, which I would grant, to allow him at 
least 15 days to prepare for the new allegation. He chose to proceed with the hearing 
on the condition that I leave the record open to allow him to present additional evidence 
on any allegation and in particular the amended allegation. I granted the motion to 
amend and I also kept the record open until April 30, 2019. The new SOR allegation is 
identified as ¶ 1.e and reads as follows: “You are indebted to [school name] for a 
delinquent debt that was charged off in the amount of $1,216. The status of the debt is 
unknown.”1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the Guideline F allegations (except ¶ 1.e, which was 
neither admitted nor denied) and those admissions are incorporated into these findings 
of fact. He denied the Guideline E allegation. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
at his present job in October 2016. He served in the Air Force from 2001 until 2003 as a 
security forces airmen (military police) when he was discharged under other than 
honorable conditions (UOTHC). He held a security clearance before his discharge. His 
discharge was so characterized because he received Article 15 UCMJ punishment from 
his commander for having an adulterous affair with the spouse of another military 
member. He has a high school diploma and has completed several college (technical) 
courses resulting in him receiving information technology (IT) certifications. He is 
married (since 2001) and has one son, age 17.2 
 
 The SOR (and subsequent amendment) alleged three delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $2,624 (no amount was alleged for SOR ¶ 1.d). The debts were listed in 
credit reports from February 2017 and March 2019 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e). The SOR also 
alleged Applicant failed to file his federal tax returns for tax years 2014-2016. It was 
further alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to list his 2015 marijuana use when 
asked if he had used any illegal drug or controlled substance within the past seven 
years on his December 5, 2016 security clearance application (SCA). He stated “no” to 
the question on his SCA. (SOR ¶ 2.a).3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16-22. 
 
2 Tr. at 34-35, 41, 47; GE 1-2 (Personal Subject Interview-September 2017). 
 
3 GE 3-4. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant‘s financial difficulties began in approximately 2013. His wife worked as 
the family’s sole means of financial support. Applicant remained at home caring for their 
son who has emotional and social issues that manifest in behavioral problems. 
Applicant’s wife worked in the commercial transportation industry and made 
approximately $30 per hour. In late 2013 and early 2014, Applicant’s wife suffered from 
medical issues that restricted her ability to work and caused her to use Family Medical 
Leave in February 2014. She was unable to return to work until August 2015. She 
received six weeks’ worth of short-term disability pay in 2014. Applicant began working 
at a convenience store to assist with the family finances. He attended school at night 
seeking certifications in the IT field. In 2015 he was hired in an IT position. They 
accrued medical debts during Applicant’s wife’s period of illness. Those debts were not 
specifically identified in the record.4  
 
 The status of the SOR debts is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b (consumer debt)-$548. Applicant presented documentation showing 
that this debt was settled in full in April 2019. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c (medical debt)-$860. Applicant incurred this medical debt from a 
motorcycle accident he was in. He presented documentation showing that this debt was 
paid in February 2016. This debt is resolved.6  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d (consumer debt). Applicant incurred this debt in the amount of 
approximately $1,000 for a gaming computer. In April 2019, he arranged to have $50 
monthly payments made from his bank account by electronic funds transfers (EFT) for 
21 months to pay this debt. This debt is being resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e (college course debt)-$1,216. Applicant incurred this debt when he 
enrolled in a course that his employer agreed to pay for on the condition that Applicant 
achieved at least a “B” grade in the course. He failed to achieve a “B” and was required 
to pay for the course himself. He negotiated a settlement with the creditor, which has 
him making a $611 payment on April 30, 2019, and a $300 payment on May 30, 2019. 
No proof of payment was submitted. This debt is being resolved.8 
 
 Applicant claimed that the reason he did not timely file his 2014-2016 tax returns 
was because his brother-in-law, who is not a tax professional, told him that if he is due a 
refund, he did not have to file his tax returns by the April 15 annual deadline. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
4 Tr. at 23-24; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. at 25; AE E. 
 
6 Tr. at 25; AE G. 
 
7 Tr. at 26; AE F. 
 
8 Tr. at 26-27; AE H. 
 
 
4 
 
Additionally, his wife had prepared their tax returns in the past and because of her 
health issues and her job situation, she was overwhelmed and the tax returns for 2014-
2016 were not timely filed. In 2018, a friend helped prepare their missing tax returns 
using tax preparation software. The 2014 tax return shows no filing date, but Applicant 
testified that it was filed in April 2018. The 2015 tax return was filed March 2, 2018 and 
the 2016 tax return was filed April 2, 2018. Applicant also stated that their 2017 tax 
return was timely filed in April 2018. 9 
  
 In Section 23 of his December 5, 2016 SCA, Applicant was asked, “In the last 
seven years, have you illegally used any drugs or controlled substance?” He responded 
by checking the “No” option. In September 2017, when interviewed by an investigator 
during his background check, Applicant was again asked if he used any drugs or 
controlled substances in the last seven years. He responded with a “No” answer. He 
was then asked again by the investigator if he had ever used illegal drugs. Applicant 
responded by asking if the investigator meant “ever?” The investigator clarified that he 
meant had Applicant used illegal drugs in the past seven years. Applicant responded to 
this question with an affirmative response and explained that he had used marijuana in 
December 2015 when a friend gave him a small amount.10   
 
 Applicant claimed during his hearing testimony that when he answered the 
question in his SCA that he had “a lot going on with my family and my personal life.” He 
also claimed he misunderstood the question and thought it was asking if he used illegal 
drugs as a manager or supervisor. He then claimed he came forward during his 
background investigation and admitted his use of marijuana in December 2015. He 
failed to mention that he initially denied such use to the investigator and it was only after 
the investigator repeated the question and clarified it that Applicant admitted to the 
marijuana use. I found Applicant’s testimony to be not credible.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 33, 36, 49-50; GE 2 (Answers to Interrogatories- April 18, 2018). 
 
10 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview-September 2017). 
 
11 Tr. at 27-29, 42. 
 
 
5 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
6 
 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He also failed 
to timely file his 2014-2016 federal tax returns. I find all the above disqualifying 
conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and   
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant either paid or has set up payment plans for his four delinquent debts. 
AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to his debts. Concerning his taxes, while his wife’s medical 
issues were beyond their control, Applicant did not take responsible action to timely file 
his 2014-2016 tax returns. His delay in filing until in either March or April 2018, shows a 
lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(g) partially 
apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant intentionally omitted information about his 2015 marijuana use when he 
completed his SCA. I do not find credible his explanation that he was overwhelmed at 
the time he completed his SCA or that he misunderstood the question. He held a 
security clearance while in the Air Force so he had filled out a SCA before and was 
familiar with the process. I conclude that he intentionally withheld this information when 
he completed his SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.a. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.   
 Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use when he was initially asked about 
past drug use by the investigator during his background interview. Upon further 
questioning on the subject, Applicant finally admitted his use. AG ¶ 17(a) does not 
apply. Honestly completing an SCA is the initial crucial step in gaining access to 
classified information. The Government expects, and must rely on, the honesty of 
applicants during this process. Therefore, providing false information at this stage is not 
a minor offense. Such deliberate action casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s wife’s medical conditions resulting in limited employment 
for her and their son’s behavioral issues. However, I also considered his untimely efforts 
to resolve file his 2014-2016 tax returns. He also deliberately failed to list his 2015 
marijuana use on his SCA. Both issues cause me to question his trustworthiness, 
reliability, and good judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:   1.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.b-1.e:  For Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:   2.a:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
