 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  
  
 
)  ADP Case No. 18-02073 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/28/2019 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
On January 25, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On August 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on June 8, 2017.    
  
 On September 14, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. He submitted a student loan payment receipt 
 
2 
 
 
and a credit report with his SOR response. On February 28, 2019, the case was 
assigned to me. On March 5, 2019, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the hearing for March 20, 2019.  
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 into evidence, which I admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
offered four documents, Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D into evidence, which I 
admitted without objection. I held the record open for one month in the event either 
party wanted to submit additional documentation. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on April 1, 2019. Neither party provided additional records, and the record was 
closed on April 20, 2019.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact: Applicant is 33 years old. He never 
married and does not have any children. In 2015, he earned an associate’s degree in 
computer information systems. He was unemployed from October 2010 until June 2015. 
His current employer, a Federal contractor, hired him in February 2017 as a scanning 
technician. The employer hires individuals with disabilities, and Applicant’s disability is 
for his condition diagnosed as autism. This is Applicant’s first time application for a 
position of public trust. (Tr. 15-18)  
 
Applicant was not employed while he attended school. His mother financially 
supported him during this time. Despite his mother’s financial assistance, Applicant’s 
long period of unemployment caused him to accumulate delinquent debt.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.c-1.f allege five student loan accounts placed for collection in 
the total amount of about $20,000. He admitted these allegations in his SOR response. 
Applicant was not aware that his student loans were delinquent until he had his 
background interview in March 2018. Since September 2018, he has made consistent 
payments in varying amounts, between $200-to-$500 a month. He missed one payment 
during the Government shutdown, while the payment system was not in operation. (Tr. 
18-21, GE 2, GE 4; AE A, AE C)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.i allege two delinquent medical accounts totaling about 
$5,400. Applicant admitted both accounts in his response to the SOR. These accounts 
stem from his five-day hospital admission in May 2015. He had insurance during this 
time, but the accounts reflect the remainder amount he was responsible to pay. 
Applicant has not yet paid these accounts, but it is his intention to pay these accounts in 
the near future. (Tr. 23-25; GE 2)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a past-due credit card account in the amount of $338, with a 
total balance of $1,096. Applicant admitted this debt. He was recently offered a 
settlement from the creditor, and it is his intention to pay this debt within the next month 
or two. (Tr. 22-23; GE 2) 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a past-due credit card account in the amount of $541. 
Applicant admitted this debt, and he provided a document at the hearing showing he 
paid the account in full in December 2018. (Tr. 23; GE 2; AE D) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j alleges a past-due account in the amount of $73. Applicant admitted 
this debt, but at the hearing, he denied any knowledge of this debt. He has not received 
any letters from any creditor for $73. He researched this account, but he was unable to 
discover if the debt belonged to him, or determine the original creditor. If he finds that he 
is responsible for this account, it is his intention to pay it. (Tr. 25-26) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k alleges a collection account in the amount of $294. Applicant originally 
denied this account in his response to the SOR, but at the hearing, he admitted this 
account belonged to him. When he researched this account, he discovered it was for 
cable service that he did not pay. It is his intention to pay this account in full in the near 
future. (Tr. 26) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a past-due account placed for collection in the amount of 
$2,783. Applicant denied this debt in his response to the SOR. He believed this account 
stemmed from 2011 when he and his mother co-signed an apartment lease. His mother 
unexpectedly became unemployed, Applicant was unemployed, and they broke the 
lease. His mother told him that she had paid this account. It was Applicant’s intention to 
discuss this account with his mother and determine whether this account had been paid 
in full. (Tr. 26-27) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m alleges a past due account in the amount of $450, for an unpaid 
utility account. Applicant denied this debt because he did not recognize this account. He 
has not received any letters or phone calls from this creditor. He tried to do some 
research into this account, but he was unable to find if the debt belonged to him, or 
locate the creditor. If he finds that he is responsible for this account, it is his intention to 
pay it. (Tr. 28; GE 2) 
 
Applicant has not participated in financial counseling, but he does maintain a 
strict monthly budget. He has saved money and recently opened a savings account. He 
does not have any new delinquent debt and he is current on all of his expenses. He files 
all of his tax returns timely. In order to save money, Applicant does not own a car and 
takes the bus instead. 
 
Applicant’s direct supervisor submitted a character reference letter. His 
supervisor disclosed that Applicant’s employer is a nonprofit company dedicated to 
employing individuals with disabilities. He found Applicant to be sincere and honest, 
despite that he struggles greatly with his autism. Applicant is dependable and makes 
sensible decisions on the job. His supervisor views Applicant’s employment as a 
success story. (AE B) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
A memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense dated November 19, 2004, 
treats public trust positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable determination may 
be made. The standard set out in the adjudicative guidelines for assignment to sensitive 
duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.1 Once the 
Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden 
shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.2 An applicant 
has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never 
shifts to the Government.3 An applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
                                                          
1 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
  
 AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” The evidence of record establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c). Further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant experienced financial difficulties due to prolonged unemployment from 
2010 to 2015. He was enrolled in classes while his mother supported him during the 
majority of this time period. The circumstances which resulted in Applicant’s financial 
 
6 
 
 
problems were not completely beyond his control. Applicant chose to devote his time to 
school instead of looking for a job, or working for an employer. However, I find these 
particular set of circumstances are unlikely to recur. Once Applicant received his 
associate’s degree, he found full-time employment.  
 
 Applicant did not realize he was delinquent in paying his student loans until his 
March 2018 background interview. Since September 2018, he has made consistent 
student loan payments, ranging from $200-to-$500 each month. In addition, he paid off 
a delinquent credit card account. He has stated his intention to pay another credit card 
account and a cable bill in the near future. Applicant has made sufficient progress 
towards resolving his financial accounts, and demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay 
delinquent creditors. Although he has not participated in financial counseling, Applicant 
is taking action to prevent additional delinquencies with a firm monthly budget. He 
recently demonstrated financial responsibility by opening a new savings account in the 
event there is an unplanned emergency. Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (b), (c) and 
(d) apply. 
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has made consistent student loan 
payments after he discovered he was delinquent. He repaid a delinquent credit card 
account, and took responsible action with his budget in an effort to pay off his remaining 
creditors. He provided a favorable character reference letter from his direct supervisor. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts or concerns as to Applicant’s 
good judgment, reliability, and suitability for a position of public trust with the 
Government.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for public trust position is granted. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
