KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1 provides that the Appeal Board shall give deference to a Judge’s
credibility determination.  From our review of the record and the Judge’s sustainable findings
about inconsistent statements, the Judge’s credibility determination is not undermined by
sufficient contrary evidence to set aside that deference.  To the extent that Applicant is raising an
issue of due process, we note there is nothing in the record that would prompt a reasonable
person to question Applicant’s ability to understand the proceedings or to represent himself. 
Moreover, we find nothing in the record that would persuade a reasonable person to conclude the
Judge lacked impartially.  These is no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied the due
process afforded by the Directive. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-00852.a1
DATE: 05/15/2019
DATE: May 15, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
---------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-00852
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
7, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
February 19, 2019, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge John Bayard Glendon denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan and received a college degree there.  He came to
the United States to pursue graduate education.  He received two master’s degrees in the late 1990s
and then moved back to Taiwan for about three years.  He married a Taiwanese women.  He returned
to the United States to continue his education and was awarded a Ph.D. in the mid-2000s.  Since
then, he has remained in the United States and has worked for a number of U.S. companies.  He has
three children who were born in the United States.  Applicant and his wife became U.S. citizens in
2016.  Shortly before his security clearance hearing, he submitted a request to renounce his
Taiwanese citizenship.  His wife remains a dual citizen.  He is unsure whether his children are dual
citizens.  
Applicant’s parents and sister are citizens and residents of Taiwan.  His mother is a former
teacher, and his father is a retired teacher.  He speaks to his parents weekly.  He testified that his
father paid for his two master’s degrees.  When asked if the Taiwanese or Chinese governments paid
for any of his education, “[he] equivocally responded ‘No, I don’t think so.’”  Decision at 3.  When
asked again, “he answered ‘No’ and then changed the subject to the low cost of education in Taiwan
and other matters.  Applicant’s responses and his demeanor at that point in the hearing suggested that
he may not have been completely candid in answering questions about who paid his tuition and
living expenses for four years of graduate education while he was studying for his two master’s
degrees in the United States.”  Id.   
Applicant’s sister is employed at a public educational institution in Taiwan.  In his security
clearance application (SCA), he indicated that he communicates with her monthly; however, he
testified his contact with her is much less.  His wife’s parents and siblings are citizens and residents
of Taiwan.  She maintains a close relationship with her family.  Her parents are retired.  Her sister
works in the financial industry, and her brother is a salesman.    
Under the “One-China” policy, the United States recognizes China as the sole legal
government over its territory, including Taiwan.  The U.S. enjoys a positive unofficial relationship
with Taiwan.  The United States faces a serious threat to its national security from Chinese
intelligence operations.  China aggressively targets U.S. sensitive and protected information and
Chinese actors are the world’s most active perpetrators of economic espionage.  “China’s collection
2
activities include the use of Chinese nationals, such as students and researchers to act as procurement
agents or intermediaries.”  Decision at 5.  Taiwan has also been an active collector of U.S. economic
technologies that has sensitive military applications.  Numerous cases have arisen involving the
illegal export or attempted export of sensitive, dual-use technology to Taiwan.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s foreign contacts create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation and a potential
conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information and
his desire to help family members.  His relationship with foreign persons is close, continuing, and
presents serious security concerns.  He presented evidence of limited ties to the United States.  He
became a U.S. citizen about five months before he applied for a security clearance.  Applicant has
renounced his Taiwanese citizenship, but such action does not outweigh the alleged security
concerns.  The Judge found for Applicant on an allegation involving three Taiwanese friends and
against him on the allegations involving his Taiwanese family members.
Discussion
In noting that English is not his native language, Applicant states that he uses different ways
to explain himself and provides as much background information as possible to make sure people
understand him.  He contends that the Judge used his manner of explaining matters as basis for
concluding he was not candid in answering questions about who paid for his post-graduate education
and for deducing that he tried to avoid answering questions on that subject.  He argues that he was
trying to provide “more information” so that the Judge would understand what he was saying and
asserts that it was unfair for the Judge to use his manner of explaining himself against him.  Appeal
Brief at 1.  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1 provides that the Appeal Board shall give deference to a Judge’s
credibility determination.  From our review of the record and the Judge’s sustainable findings about
inconsistent statements, the Judge’s credibility determination is not undermined by sufficient
contrary evidence to set aside that deference.  To the extent that Applicant is raising an issue of due
process, we note there is nothing in the record that would prompt a reasonable person to question
Applicant’s ability to understand the proceedings or to represent himself.  Moreover, we find nothing
in the record that would persuade a reasonable person to conclude the Judge lacked impartially. 
These is no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied the due process afforded by the Directive. 
 
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s conclusion that “[A]pplicant provided no documentary
evidence or testimony of his other financial ties to the United States.”  Appeal Brief at 1, quoting
Decision at 5.  He argues that, if requested, he could provide bank statements and other financial
information to show he has strong financial ties to the United States.  As provided in Directive ¶
E3.1.15, Applicant’s opportunity for presenting witnesses and other evidence to mitigate the alleged
security concerns was during the hearing .  Directive ¶ E3.1.29 provides that the Appeal Board
cannot receive or consider new evidence on appeal.  
 
Applicant further inquires as to what other evidence he could have presented to mitigate the
alleged security concern.  It is not appropriate for the Appeal Board to provide advice to applicants
3
about what evidence they could or should have presented at a hearing.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 18-
00329 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2018).1   
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to a challenge to the way in which the Judge
weighed the evidence.  Those arguments, however, are not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2017).  
Applicant has failed to establish that the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor  of the national
security.”
1 In his appeal brief, Applicant notes that he has not received a copy of the transcript but does not raise that
omission as an appeal issue. 
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
