KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Considering the record as a whole, we conclude that Applicant has made a prima facie
showing that she submitted some evidence that the Judge did not include in the record. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the best resolution of this case is to remand it to the Judge for a
new decision.  Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 18-01354.a1
DATE: 05/13/2019
DATE: May 13, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
-------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-01354
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
21, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the administrative record.  On February 28, 2019, after considering the record, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant contends that she submitted evidence to the Judge that did not make it into the
record.  Although this is new evidence, we will consider it on the limited issue of due process.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05302 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 29, 2017).  Considering the record as a whole, we
conclude that Applicant has made a prima facie showing that she submitted some evidence that the
Judge did not include in the record. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the best resolution of this case is to remand it to the Judge for
a new decision.  Chief Department Counsel states that he has no objection to a remand under the
facts of this case.  Accordingly, we remand the case to the Judge to consider the evidence that
Applicant attempted to submit prior to the close of the record.  Other issues raised by Applicant in
her brief are not ripe for consideration at this time.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.    
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                 
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
