KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Instead, it describes the reasons for his financial problems and his efforts to resolve them. 
Applicant also indicates that a security clearance is required for his job.  The Directive, however,
does not permit us to consider the impact of an unfavorable decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-01662.a1
DATE: 05/06/2019
DATE: May 6, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
---------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-01662
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
3, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 8, 2019, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
 Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Instead, it describes the reasons for his financial problems and his efforts to resolve them.  Applicant 
also indicates that a security clearance is required for his job.  The Directive, however, does not
permit us to consider the impact of an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04202 at
4 (App. Bd. Dec. 24, 2015). 
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale          
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
