 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
    
     
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01579 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/17/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns due to 
intentional falsifications on her security clearance application. National security eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 4, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). On 
August 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.    
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 15, 2018. She provided five documents 
with her response, and she admitted all of the SOR allegations. Applicant requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On February 28, 2019, the case was assigned 
 
2 
 
 
to me. On March 4, 2019, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing, setting the hearing for March 19, 2019.  
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibit (GE) 1-4, 
which I admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant did not provide additional 
documentation at the hearing. The five documents attached to her SOR response were 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-E, which I admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and called her father to testify on her behalf. I held the record open 
until April 19, 2019, in the event either party wanted to submit additional documentation. 
No additional documents were received. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 1, 2019, and the record was closed on April 19, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, I make the following 
findings of fact:  Applicant is 32 years old. She earned some college credits, but did not 
earn enough for a college degree. She married in 2016, and is the mother of a young 
daughter born in July 2018. She has been employed by a DOD contractor since 
February 2017. She does not currently possess a DOD security clearance, but her 
employer is sponsoring her for a security clearance in order that she may perform 
specific employment duties. (Tr. 5, 12-14, 36-38; GE 1) 
 
SOR allegation ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant falsified material facts when she 
completed her SCA in April 2017. In response to Section 13A – she listed employment 
with a department store, but she deliberately failed to disclose that she was terminated 
by her employer for tardiness in about January 2011. Instead, she listed her reason for 
leaving this employment was because she had to care for her sister. Applicant admitted 
this allegation in her SOR response. During the hearing, she stated that she was 
ashamed about being fired from an employer. She did not list accurate information on 
the SCA purely out of embarrassment. (Tr. 14-17; GE 1, GE 2) 
 
SOR allegation ¶ 1.b alleges that that Applicant falsified material facts when she 
completed her SCA in April 2017. Specifically, in response to Section 22, she denied 
that she had “EVER” been charged with an offense involving drugs or alcohol. She 
admitted this allegation in her response to the SOR, but denied that she intentionally 
omitted the adverse information from the SCA. Applicant claimed that she knew her 
driver’s license had been suspended, but she did not recall that she was also charged 
with open container at the time of her arrest. (GE 1) 
 
The Government records show that in 2010, Applicant was stopped by police for 
a traffic infraction, when the police officer noticed an open container of alcohol in the 
car. Applicant admitted the open container of alcohol was hers, but stated she had been 
drinking it three hours earlier and forgot that she had it in her car. Applicant was 
arrested and charged with driving while license suspended, and transporting an open 
container of alcohol. At the hearing, Applicant stated that she had completely forgotten 
about the open container incident. She only remembered being arrested for driving with 
 
3 
 
 
a suspended license. She also denied that the alcohol in the car was hers. When 
confronted with her admission in the police report, Applicant claimed that she did not 
recall telling a police officer that the alcohol was hers. It was her contention that the 
police report was inaccurate. (Tr. 17-21; GE 4) 
 
In March 2018, during Applicant’s background interview with an authorized DOD 
investigator, she was confronted with her 2010 arrest, in part, for open container. 
Applicant denied all knowledge of this charge, despite the fact that she spent [or 
“despite spending”] one night in detention. In July 2018, she adopted the report of her 
background interview as being accurate, after making several changes. She denied any 
knowledge that she had been charged with an alcohol-related offense. At the hearing, 
Applicant claimed the alcohol belonged to another passenger in the car. Since she was 
the driver, she was charged with the open container violation. Applicant stated that she 
was under stress during the interview because she was pregnant at the time. She 
claimed that her failure to report this information on her SCA was due to oversight. (Tr. 
9-10, 18-22, 34-35; GE 2)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges Applicant intentionally failed to disclose on her April 2017 
SCA, under Section 26, that a 2011 civil judgment had been filed against her. She 
admitted this hospital bill, which subsequently resulted in a judgment, but her mother 
later told her the judgment actually belonged to someone else. Applicant provided a 
document with her SOR response which showed this judgment was dismissed in April 
2012. Applicant said it was not her intent to conceal or falsify her SCA regarding the civil 
judgment. During her March 2018 background interview, Applicant told the investigator 
that her mother was disputing the hospital bill. She did not mention that the judgment 
had been dismissed. She told the investigator that she made no attempt to pay the bill 
and could provide no documentation regarding the judgment. (Tr. 22-27; AE B) 
 
   SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant intentionally failed to disclose required information 
on her April 2017 SCA, under Section 26, which asked if she had ever defaulted on a 
loan, or if she was currently 120 days or more delinquent on any debts. In her SOR 
response, she admitted this allegation, but she could not recall why she failed to 
disclose her four delinquent student loans. Since the birth of her daughter, Applicant 
claimed to have set up payment arrangements for her student loans. During her March 
2018 background interview, Applicant was confronted with her adverse financial 
information by the investigator. She stated that she did not list her civil judgment and 
unpaid student loans on the SCA because she was embarrassed. At the hearing, 
Applicant admitted she had reviewed her credit report at the time she filled out the SCA. 
She was confused since some credit reports reflected the judgment and delinquent 
student loans, but she claimed other credit reports did not. Applicant admitted that she 
did not continue her student loan payments due to other current financial obligations 
she is trying to resolve. She did remember telling the investigator that she was 
embarrassed about the judgment and delinquent student loans. (Tr. 28-34; GE 1, GE 2) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes. … 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable under the established facts in this 
case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant deliberately falsified her 2017 SCA when she failed to disclose her job 
termination, her alcohol-related offense, and her adverse financial information. She did 
not voluntarily provide this information during her background interview until she was 
confronted with the derogatory information by the investigator. Applicant has provided 
inconsistent accounts as to why this information was not disclosed. She asserted that 
she did not remember her arrest included a charge of open container of alcohol when 
she filled out the security application. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. 
  
 I have considered all the evidence, including Applicant’s testimony. I also 
considered her motive for falsifying the April 2017 SCA. She had been newly hired by 
the DOD contractor in February 2017. She was embarrassed by the adverse 
information she was required to disclose. I considered her claim that she had forgotten 
the open container incident, despite being arrested and spending a night in jail, and the 
inherent improbability that she would forget such a significant event. I did not find 
Applicant’s explanations credible. She did not made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct 
omissions or falsifications during her background interview. Applicant admitted to the 
investigator the reason she did not list her job termination and adverse credit was due to 
embarrassment. She demonstrated a pattern of dishonesty, which casts doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and overall good judgment. After reviewing her history of 
deceit, I cannot conclude her dishonest behavior is unlikely to recur. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. This SOR highlights conduct that provides insight 
 
7 
 
 
to a person’s character and integrity. Applicant falsified her SCA because she was 
embarrassed. Intentionally omitting or falsifying relevant information to conceal 
derogatory information from a security application out of embarrassment, or even fear of 
maintaining employment, does not mitigate falsification. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried her burden 
of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
