KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: A Judge is presumed to be unbiased, and a party who asserts otherwise has a heavy
burden of persuasion on appeal.  We find nothing in the record, particularly in the Judge’s
conduct of the hearing and in her written decision, that would likely convince a reasonable
person that she lacked the requisite impartiality.  Applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s
adverse rulings is not sufficient to support a claim of bias. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-01564.a1
DATE: 05/30/2019
DATE: May 30, 2019
)
In Re: )
)
---------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 18-01564
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
)
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
26, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 22, 2019, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Erin C. Hogan denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against him;
whether the Judge erred in finding that his omissions from his security clearance application (SCA)
were deliberate; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Born overseas, Applicant became a U.S. citizen in the late 1980s.  He served in the U.S.
military, both on active duty and in the National Guard.  Applicant studied for a master’s degree but
did not complete the program.  However, he received an M.D. degree, although he has never
practiced medicine.
Applicant’s SOR lists numerous delinquent debts, for student loans (totaling nearly
$170,000), credit cards, a timeshare, telecommunication services, etc.  Applicant also had three
judgments entered against him, for about $3,800, $4,900, and $930.  Applicant’s financial problems
began when his wife filed for divorce while he was in medical school.  He worked for a while at a
job that paid him about $145,000 annually, but he was laid off when the mission ended.
Applicant purchased a house using funds he had earned while employed, and it is worth about
$200,000.  He stayed with his mother to care for her during an illness, for which he received a small
amount of compensation, and currently tries to earn money by selling merchandise.  He testified that
he lives on less than $10,000 a year.  He has made some payments toward his student loans.  He has
not received financial counseling.  He provided evidence that the statute of limitations has run on
most of his student loans.
When completing his SCA, Applicant did not disclose the judgments against him or his other
delinquent debts.  He testified that he was not sure why he did not list his judgments, although it may
have been due to a mistake or to failing to understand the meaning of “judgment.”  However, he
admitted that he attended a trial regarding one of the judgments listed in the SOR.  He also testified
that he did not know why he did not disclose his other delinquencies.  
Applicant presented certificates and awards that he had received while in the military, letters
of reference, and certificates of appreciation.  He does not believe that his financial problems raise
a security concern.  He cites to his honorable military service and his work as a contract employee. 
He believes that his having previously been granted a security clearance shows that he should receive
2
a favorable adjudication in the case before us.  He intends to pay his debts once he finds a well-
paying job.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems were ongoing, that he had not
demonstrated responsible action in regard to his debts, and that he had not made a good-faith effort
to pay or resolve his debts.  Concerning Applicant’s SCA omissions, the Judge stated that his
explanations therefor were not credible.  He admitted, for example, that he had been aware of the
judgments and of the fact that he had been living off credit card debt while unemployed.  Though
she noted Applicant’s military service, his support for the U.S. as a contract employee, and his
support for his ailing mother, the Judge concluded that he had not demonstrated a track record of
debt resolution. She also concluded that Applicant’s SCA omissions undermined his case for a
favorable decision.
Discussion
Much of Applicant’s brief consists of assertions from outside the record, which we cannot
consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  He argues that the Judge “[went] out of [her] way to find anything
that insults the person’s integrity and character to link it to the finance and support [her adverse
decision].” Appeal Brief  at 1.  A Judge is presumed to be unbiased, and a party who asserts
otherwise has a heavy burden of persuasion on appeal.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02391 at 2 (App.
Bd. Aug. 7, 2018).  We find nothing in the record, particularly in the Judge’s conduct of the hearing
and in her written decision, that would likely convince a reasonable person that she lacked the
requisite impartiality.  Applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s adverse rulings is not sufficient
to support a claim of bias.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-05047 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 8, 2017).
Applicant denies that he deliberately falsified his SCA.  However, evidence regarding
Applicant’s educational attainments, the clarity of the questions at issue, and his awareness of the
extent of his financial problems support the challenged finding.  We also note the Judge’s adverse
credibility determination, to which we give deference.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  We conclude that the
challenged finding is supported by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”1  See ISCR
Case No. 17-02145 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 10, 2018).
Applicant cites to his military record, his support for U.S. objectives as a contractor, and his
having held a clearance previously without incident or concern.  Applicant has not rebutted the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
17-04198 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2019).  Applicant’s prior good security record does not undermine
1See also the following: Applicant “was asked if he had any judgments entered against him in the last seven
years. [Applicant] provided he has. [He] was asked the reason he did not report this on his security questionnaire. [He]
provided that he did not report this judgment or any other financial delinquency on his security questionnaire because
they are not important to him.”  Government Exhibit 6, Clearance Interview Summary, at 10.  
3
the Judge’s evaluation of the concerns arising from his financial problems and deliberate omissions. 
Even those with good prior records can encounter circumstances in which their judgment and
reliability might be brought into question.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02599 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan.
18, 2019).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board    
5
