 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00042 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
05/09/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). His criminal conduct casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. National security eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 20, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On August 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines J and E. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.    
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2018. He admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, but 
he failed to admit or deny SOR ¶ 2.a, which was a cross-reference to SOR ¶ 1.a. I have 
 
2 
 
 
interpreted this omission as a denial by Applicant. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. On December 31, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for January 16, 2019. 
On January 4, 2019, the case was assigned to me. 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibit (GE) 1-7, 
which I admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A-J, which I entered into evidence without objection. (Tr. 26-32) Applicant testified, 
and I held the record open until February 16, 2019, in the event either party wanted to 
submit additional documentation. On February 3, 2019, Applicant provided two 
additional documents. I admitted AE K and L into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2019, and the record was closed on 
February 16, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, I make the following 
findings of fact:  Applicant is 68 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1973, and 
a master’s degree in 1978. He married in 1973 and adopted two children, now adults, 
from his wife’s previous marriage. They also have an adult child from their union. One of 
his adult children has special needs. Applicant served in the U.S. Army for 22 years in 
the Air Defense Artillery, including multiple overseas deployments. He retired in 1996 at 
the rank of lieutenant colonel. Immediately after his retirement, he was employed by a 
DOD contractor. He has worked for this DOD contractor for nearly 23 years. He 
currently possesses a DOD security clearance. Applicant has received several 
certificates, letters of appreciation, and favorable employee evaluations during the 
course of his employment. (Tr. 21-25; GE 1; AE H, AE I, AE J) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that in February 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with four counts of felony theft for stealing luggage from the local airport between 
November 2013 and February 2014. Applicant admitted this allegation in his response 
to the SOR. During the hearing, Applicant admitted his arrest but denied stealing any 
bags. He mistakenly took a bag in the local airport on the day of his arrest, but it was 
never his intent to steal it. He claimed the other three pieces of stolen luggage he was 
charged with did not involve him. (Tr. 26) 
 
In December 2015, Applicant participated in a background interview with an 
authorized DOD investigator. When questioned about his February 4, 2014 arrest, 
Applicant stated that he flew into the local airport of State A for a work assignment. He 
took his two checked bags from the luggage carousel and left the airport. He soon 
realized he forgot to retrieve a carry-on bag that he was unable to fit in the overhead 
compartment when he boarded the airplane. He stated this bag had been checked with 
the airplane’s cargo. He did not receive a claim tag for this bag. Applicant called the 
airline to see if his bag was at the airport. The airline had difficulties tracking his bag 
since he did not check it in at the airline counter and the bag was never tagged with a 
claim tag. (Emphasis added) A couple days later the airline called him to report several 
 
3 
 
 
unclaimed bags had arrived and requested Applicant to come to the airport to see if one 
of the bags belonged to him. (Tr. 48; GE 2)  
 
During the background interview, Applicant told the investigator that he arrived at 
the airport at approximately 6:00 p.m. He came in from the outside door near the 
luggage area and found what he thought was his bag and walked away. He was 
stopped by the police and questioned about the bag in his possession. He told the 
officer it was his bag, but after further examination, it was determined to be another 
individual’s bag. He is legally blind in his right eye and believed this contributed to him 
picking up the wrong bag. He was taken by the police to a holding room for questioning. 
Applicant had flown into this airport on countless occasions for his employer. Police 
reviewed security tapes and matched him with three other earlier incidents where 
luggage had been stolen from the airport. In addition, police noted that on each of these 
occasions, the suspected thief had come from the outside door to the luggage area with 
a luggage cart instead of coming directly from the flight arrival gate. The police obtained 
a search warrant of his hotel room, but they did not find any incriminating evidence. 
Despite the search warrant result and Applicant’s explanations, the police charged him 
with four felony counts of theft. (GE 2) 
 
Applicant hired a local attorney. He did not want to plead guilty to the charges as 
he was “in no way involved in the theft of luggage.” His attorney advised him that if he 
did go to trial, Applicant would have to pay him an additional $10,0001 in legal fees, and 
he also indicated the case could drag out for two years or longer. The state’s attorney 
offered a plea bargain. The agreement included conditions that Applicant pay the airline 
restitution in the approximate amount of $3,000, and perform 24 hours of community 
service. After he fulfilled the terms of the agreement, the court would place the charges 
on the Stet docket. If Applicant did not accept the plea bargain, the DA would proceed 
with the criminal trial. Since Applicant claimed this was the most cost-effective and 
expedient way to handle the situation, he accepted the plea bargain and fulfilled the 
specified conditions. (Tr. 38, 58; GE 2) 
 
The police records showed the airline reported a suitcase was stolen on 
November 17, 2013. The detective reviewed video footage of the luggage area which 
showed a white male removing the bag and leaving the terminal. Another theft occurred 
on November 19, 2013. The same white male was witnessed on the video footage, 
about 50 years old, wearing dark colored shoes, light jeans, and a dark colored waist 
length jacket, taking a blue suitcase that was reported as stolen. The surveillance 
footage showed that on both occasions, the male suspect did not walk to the baggage 
claim from the airline gate. Instead, the male suspect entered the baggage claim area 
from the outside door with a luggage cart to retrieve the suitcases. The police placed a 
bulletin of the male suspect’s photo for the airline employees to call police if he was 
seen in the baggage area. There were no thefts of luggage reported from November 21, 
2013 through February 1, 2014. (GE 5) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant later said he had paid $7,000 for his attorney, and if he went to trial, he would have to pay an 
additional $13,000-$15,000. (Tr. 58) 
 
4 
 
 
On approximately February 2, 2014, an airline representative notified a police 
detective that a bag was stolen from the baggage carousel. The surveillance video 
showed the same male suspect that was posted on the November 2013 bulletin. On this 
date, he was wearing a dark blue peacoat and blue jeans. On February 4, 2014, an 
airline employee called a police detective to report that the male suspect from the 
bulletin was back at the baggage area, wearing a blue coat and blue jeans. At 
approximately 2:00 p.m., the detective located the male suspect in the hourly garage, 
with a luggage cart that had a black Samsonite roller suitcase, without a claim tag. The 
male suspect told the detective that he flew in yesterday and had returned to the airport 
to claim his lost bag. (Tr. 52; GE 5) 
 
While the detective was talking with Applicant, a phone call came in that a 
passenger could not locate his black roller suitcase, and he told the airline his name 
card was located on the outside of the bag. The detective inspected the roller suitcase 
that was on Applicant’s luggage cart which showed the victim’s name card on the 
outside of the bag. The police found the victim’s airline claim tag in a trash can inside 
the hourly garage. Applicant was apprehended by the police for questioning. After 
reviewing Applicant’s travel itinerary, the police discovered Applicant had been in State 
A during the two incidents of luggage theft in November 2014, and the earlier incident of 
luggage theft on February 2, 2014. Applicant was charged with four felony counts of 
theft. (Tr. 52; GE 5)  
 
At the hearing, Applicant was asked about the circumstances which led to his 
arrest. On February 2, 2014, Applicant carried his bag, filled with books, when he 
boarded the airplane. It would not fit in the overhead compartment, and the airline 
attendant checked his bag without placing an airline claim tag on it. When he exited the 
airplane, Applicant assumed his bag would be in the aisle, but it was not there. He 
asked the flight attendant about the checked bag, and he was informed that his bag 
would be located at the baggage claim. He also explained that he never carries his bags 
for two reasons: (1) he has a bad back, and on the day of his arrest, (2) his lost carry-on 
bag was filled with books, so it was heavy.2 Applicant found his two checked suitcases, 
but his carry-on bag was not there. He reported his bag missing to the airline and 
provided his phone number. Since his bag had not been tagged, the airline could not 
track it. He was told that his bag may arrive on a later flight, and they would give him a 
call. On the day of his arrest, he claimed he received a call from the airline letting him 
know his bag may be there, but they did not know for certain since his bag was not 
tagged. (Emphasis added) (Tr. 26-30, 32, 35) 
 
  Applicant believed he was identified on the video footage near the baggage claim 
on dates he did not fly on the airline, which also included some of the dates the 
suitcases were stolen, because he had visited the USO in the airport to acquire free 
drinks, snacks, and he enjoyed talking with families. He did not provide any USO sign-in 
sheets to corroborate his claim. On the day of his arrest, Applicant admitted he had 
                                                          
2 Although Applicant carried his heavy bag filled with books when he boarded the airplane on February 2, 
2014. 
 
 
5 
 
 
removed the airline tag from the suitcase. Applicant described himself as being a little 
obsessive.  Whenever he retrieves his suitcase, he immediately rips off all of the tags 
and throws them away. This always has been his consistent habit when traveling. 
Applicant did not provide any witness statements to corroborate his claim. (Tr. 39-41, 
53, 60-61) 
 
Applicant’s salary with his current employer is approximately $260,000. He was 
asked why, with his significant income, he would not pay the additional money to his 
attorney to fight the felony theft charges that were filed against him. Applicant claimed 
that his income in 2014 was significantly lower, about $140,000 to $150,000. (Emphasis 
added) When questioned about this substantial difference in salary from the same 
employer, Applicant said it was due to him not receiving bonuses in 2014. He then 
stated that his decision to accept the plea bargain was not fully financially based. He 
also consulted with his lawyer, family, and after management’s assertion that his 
acceptance of the plea bargain would not hurt him in any way, he took the deal. I 
requested Applicant provide a copy of his filed 2014 tax return while the record was held 
open for 30 days. The requested 2014 tax return was provided on February 3, 2019. It 
showed, in part, that Applicant’s annual income was $233,424, plus taking into account 
his annual pensions and annuities of $52,817, he had a combined total income of 
$287,466 for 2014. (Emphasis added) (Tr. 63-66; AE K, AE L) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J; Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31, and the following is 
potentially applicable: 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 In February 2014, Appellant was arrested on four felony counts of theft. He 
accepted a plea bargain and paid approximately $3,000 restitution to the airline, and 
performed 24 hours of community service. The court placed the charges on the Stet 
docket. The charges were not dismissed for lack of evidence. If Applicant had not 
fulfilled the conditions of the plea bargain, the DA made it clear they would continue with 
prosecution of the case against him. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Appellant’s charges of felony theft were based on two thefts of luggage in late 
November 2013 and two thefts in February 2014. After the two thefts in November, the 
police made a bulletin with the male suspect’s picture taken from the surveillance 
footage. The police asked the airline employees to call police if the suspect was seen in 
the airport. A diligent airline employee saw the male suspect from the bulletin photo and 
immediately called the police. The suspect spotted near the baggage claim area turned 
out to be Applicant. He had entered from the outside door with a luggage cart to retrieve 
a bag, just as the suspect did in the three earlier thefts. While returning to his car, 
Applicant removed the tags from the suitcase and threw them into the trash can. 
Applicant claimed it was a fluke that he was in possession of another individual’s bag at 
the time the detective stopped to question him. 
 
 Applicant did not provide truthful information when he was questioned about his 
2014 income. He claimed he made approximately $145,000 due to him not receiving 
employment bonuses that year. A copy of his 2014 tax return showed that his income 
was almost double the amount he reported. It is important to note, however, that 
Applicant consistently reported that his lost carry-on bag did not have an airline tracking 
tag on it. The day he arrived at the airport to look for his lost bag, Applicant took a 
suitcase that had an airline tracking tag on it. The tag should have put him on notice that 
this was not his bag, or at the very least, he should have taken a closer examination of 
the bag since a name card was located on the outside of the suitcase. Applicant did not 
work with an airline representative to claim his lost carry-on bag.  
 
 Applicant’s travel itinerary showed he was in the area when the three earlier 
thefts occurred. The video footage also showed him in the airport on days he was not 
traveling on an airplane. Applicant claimed he would go to the airport’s USO for free 
drinks and snacks. When Applicant was stopped by the detective after an airline 
employee recognized the suspect from the bulletin, Applicant just happened to be in 
 
8 
 
 
possession of a suitcase that was reported missing. I find this an unlikely coincidence. 
Applicant’s explanations are not credible or corroborated. His criminal conduct casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. His failure to accept 
responsibility or express any remorse for his misconduct demonstrates that he has not 
been successfully rehabilitated. The above mitigating conditions do not apply. 
  
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes. … 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable under the established facts in 
this case: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. 
Such conduct includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct was addressed under that specific guideline. The 
same issue was cross-alleged under the personal conduct guideline. No specific 
personal conduct allegations were raised beyond what was raised under the appropriate 
guideline. I have previously addressed the issue under Guideline J.  
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
 
9 
 
 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has consistently denied that he stole suitcases from an airport when he 
was on travel for his employer. Having determined that his explanations were not 
credible or corroborated, the evidence supports he engaged in criminal conduct, and his 
personal conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and overall good 
judgment. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
  
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. This SOR highlights serious offenses that provide 
insight to a person’s character and integrity. Applicant has not accepted responsibility 
for his misconduct, nor has he expressed any remorse for his deceit. I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns raised by his criminal conduct and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
