 
1 
 
                                                          
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01058 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kelly Folks, Esq., Department Counsel, and Nicole A. Smith, Esq., 
Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
05/01/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a 
naturalized U.S. citizen from Russia, failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by 
her ongoing contact with family members and friends who are citizens and residents of 
Russia. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2018, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on June 8, 2017.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on November 28, 2018, I admitted Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
without objection. Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence, but made 
statements during the hearing. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 
2018.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts regarding the Russia. The written request and the attached documents is 
admitted as Hearing Exhibit II.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 Applicant, 52, has worked for her current employer, a federal contractor, since 
May 2015, as a software engineer. She owned and operated her own business from 
2005 to 2015, and worked for the same federal contracting company as a 
subcontractor. She completed a security clearance application, her first, in August 2016. 
Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen from Russia, disclosed contacts with individuals 
who are citizens of Russia, including her mother, two half-sisters, a niece, an uncle, as 
well as a friend with Danish citizenship and another friend with Russian citizenship. 
During her March 2017 subject interview, she revealed ongoing contact with 25 foreign 
nationals, including 12 who are citizens and residents of Russia. The SOR alleges that 
these contacts create a foreign influence concern.2 
Russia has a highly centralized, weak multi-party political system dominated by 
the president. Russia has significant human-rights problems, marked by restrictions on 
civil liberties, discrimination, denial of due process, forced confessions, torture, other 
prisoner mistreatment, and the government’s failure to prosecute officials who commit 
serious violations. Government officials also engage in electronic surveillance without 
proper authorization.3  
Russia is one of the most aggressive countries conducting espionage against the 
United States, focusing on obtaining proprietary information and advance weapons 
technologies beneficial to Russia’s military modernization and economic development. 
Russia’s intelligence services as well as private companies and other entities frequently 
seek to exploit Russian citizens or persons with family ties to Russia who can use their 
insider access to corporate networks to steal secrets. They also have offered financial 
inducements to U.S. government officials and citizens to encourage them to 
                                                          
2 Tr. 17, 39-40; GE 1. 
 
3 HE II.  
 
3 
 
compromise classified information. Russia’s attempts to collect U.S. technological and 
economic information represent a growing and persistent threat to U.S. security.4 
 Applicant is from a Russian province bordering the Baltic Sea. She immigrated to 
the United States in 1996 with her second husband. The couple divorced in 2000. 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 2002. She adopted her son in 
2009 from a country in central Asia. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 
2010. Applicant’s mother, 77, is a citizen of Russia, who has permanent resident status 
in the United States. She has lived with Applicant since 2009. She receives the majority 
of her financial support from Applicant, but also receives a small pension from the 
Russian government because of her 30 years’ service as a teacher. Applicant believes 
the pension is approximately $200 per month. Applicant has at least $560,000 in U.S.-
based assets including her home ($300,000) and retirement savings ($260,000). She 
earns $156,000 annually. Applicant does not own any Russia-based assets, but does 
maintain some ties to Russia. She has traveled to Russia twice in the last ten years. Her 
last trip occurred between December 2016 and January 2017, during which she visited 
her paternal half-sister who resides in Applicant’s hometown as well as the city where 
her maternal half-sister resides. She also visited friends in the city where she attended 
high school and college.5  
 Applicant’s paternal half-sister, 46, is a cosmetologist. They do not maintain 
frequent contact, but communicate through a messaging application on their birthdays 
and holidays. Applicant visits her sister when she is in Russia. Applicant maintains 
closer and more frequent contact with her maternal half-sister. At the time Applicant 
completed her security clearance application, her half-sister was working as a secretary 
for a local government official, but she is currently unemployed. Applicant talks to this 
half-sister at least once per month. Applicant’s half-sister and her 14-year-old daughter, 
come the United States every year to visit Applicant, her mother, and her son. 
Sometimes, Applicant pays for their trip and they stay in her home.6  
 When she completed the security clearance application, Applicant’s maternal 
uncle was also a citizen and resident of Russia. He died in April 2018.7  
 In addition to her family members, Applicant maintains contact with high school 
and college friends through two separate social media groups. After winning a national 
math competition, Applicant was selected to attend an elite science and mathematics 
high school. She then earned admission into a prominent university where she studied 
applied mathematics and mechanics. Because of her education, she was not required 
to do compulsory military service. In her March 2017 subject interview, she identified 25 
former schoolmates with whom she maintains ongoing contact. During the interview, 
                                                          
4 HE II. 
 
5 Tr. 16-19, 39, 41-43, 48; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. 19-25; GE 1, 3.  
 
7 Tr. 26; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
she was not able to supply details of her friends’ residency or employment information. 
In a September 2017 subject interview, she provided additional details about her foreign 
contacts. At the hearing, she disclosed that she obtained employment information from 
them after disclosing she needed the information for her security clearance application.8  
Of those individuals she reported, 11 are residents and citizens of Russia. Four 
of the eleven work as executives in private industry, including the banking and beauty 
sectors. However, the nature of two of the companies Applicant disclosed are unclear 
from the record and are not readily determined by a simple internet search. Three of her 
classmates work in STEM-related fields. One friend works as researcher for an 
unidentified geological company. Another friend is a computer programmer in private 
industry. One friend is a professor at Applicant’s alma mater. Applicant claims that none 
of her former classmates work for the Russian government or on government contracts. 
Applicant states that she infrequently posts writings in the groups. She maintains 
occasional contact with some of the group members outside the group on birthdays. 
She may visit with these friends during her trips to Russia. She is willing to cease 
participation in both groups if required to maintain a security clearance.9  
Policies 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
8 Tr. 33, 46-47; GE 2-3. 
 
9 Tr. 27-38, 43-46; GE 3; HE III. 
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites  
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
  
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interests . . .are a national security concern . . . if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person in a way that is inconsistent with U.S. interest or otherwise made 
vulnerable to pressure and coercion by any foreign interest.” An assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign interest is 
located, including but not limited to, consideration such as whether it is known target 
U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 In this case, the concern is not just that Applicant’s foreign relatives may be 
vulnerable to government coercion or inducement; there is also concern that Applicant’s 
continued contacts with individuals, specifically former classmates, may make her 
vulnerable to exploitation. In the defense industry, foreign-born engineers and scientists 
play a critical role in developing and implementing new technology, and that technology 
may be of interest to others whose interests are contrary to the United States. Applicant 
works in a STEM field and has several Russian contacts who are professionals in that 
arena. U.S. intelligence has identified Russia as an active perpetrator of industrial 
espionage against the United States, often targeting individual’s with ties to the country.  
Accordingly, Applicant’s relationships create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.10  Applicant’s ongoing contacts with 
former classmates from high school and college also create a potential conflict of 
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information 
or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information.11  
 
 While her Russian family members may not hold positions or participate in 
activities that create a risk a potential security risk; the same cannot be said of 
Applicant’s social contacts. While her familial and social contacts may be infrequent, 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
11 AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
6 
 
they are not casual. Although Applicant demonstrated significant ties to the United 
States, her ongoing ties with residents of citizens and residents of Russia are too 
extensive to support a finding that Applicant would resolve any conflicts of information in 
favor of U.S interests. None of the foreign influence mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant having access to classified 
information. In reaching this decision I have considered the whole-person factor detailed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Under the “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard, an 
applicant has a heavy burden of demonstrating extenuation or mitigation of facts with 
negative security significance. Because she failed to meet this burden, the foreign 
influence concerns raised in the SOR must be resolved in favor of the national 
security.12 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.   
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 99-0601at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2001);  ISCR Case No. 99-0511at 8-9 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2000); ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 15, 1999); Dorfmont v. Brown, 914 F.2d 1399, 
1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)(no presumption in favor of granting or continuing a 
security clearance); Directive, Item E2.2.2. (any doubt must be resolved in favor of national security). 
