 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-02125  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
May 3, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 11, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines C and B.  The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 31, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on February 21, 2019.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on February 25, 
2019, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on March 20, 2019.  The 
Government offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered five exhibits, referred to as 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through E, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant 
 
2 
 
testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 4, 
2019. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Department Counsel provided a five page summary of 
the facts, supported by four Government documents pertaining to Saudi Arabia, 
identified as HE 1.  The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary.  
Applicant had no objection.  I took administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. 
Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to 
reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and is not married.  He has a Master’s degree in 
Aerospace Engineering, and currently holds the position of Engineer.  Applicant is 
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment with a defense 
contractor.  He began working for his current employer in May 2016. 
  
 Applicant was born in Mesa, Arizona in March 1989.  He and his family are of 
Saudi Arabian ancestry, and were in the United States because Applicant’s father had 
been granted an educational scholarship from an oil company in Saudi Arabia (Saudi 
Aramco) to pursue his degree at a University in the United States.  When Applicant’s 
father graduated, Applicant was about two or three months old, and his parents moved 
him and his siblings back to Saudi Arabia.  Applicant grew up and was raised in Saudi 
Arabia. With a desire to return to the United States someday, in 2006, while in high 
school, Applicant’s father arranged for Applicant to live with a Canadian family in 
Canada for a while, where he studied English and western culture.  Following that, 
Applicant lived with an American family in North Carolina, where he studied English and 
learned the American culture.  Applicant then went back to Saudi Arabia and graduated 
from high school in 2007.   
 
 That same year, Applicant applied for an educational scholarship in Saudi 
Arabia, made available to Saudi Arabian citizens, who are students with good GPA’s; 
and who graduate from high school in Saudi Arabia, to be able to study and pursue his 
college degree in the United States.  Applicant was awarded the scholarship and 
attended the same University his father had attended.  When Applicant finished his 
Bachelor’s degree in 2012, he applied for a scholarship to obtain his Master’s degree, 
which he completed in 2014.  After finishing that, he applied for the Ph.D. program.  
Applicant completed his first year of the Ph.D. program, and then suspended it, and 
 
3 
 
started working for his current employer in 2016.  He has now closed his scholarship 
account with Saudi Arabia.  If he decides to complete his Ph.D. in the future, he will 
have to pay for it himself.   
 
 Applicant explained that in Saudi Arabia everything is basically owned by the 
Government.  They own the oil industry as well as the hospitals.  They also distribute 
money earned by the Government back to the people to help them obtain their 
education.  In total, Applicant received approximately $200,000 in educational funds 
provided to him from the Saudi Arabian Government scholarship to obtain his 
undergraduate and graduate degrees in the United States between July 2008 and May 
2016.  Applicant states that he has no duty, responsibility or obligation to pay back the 
Saudi Arabian Government for the scholarships.      
  
 Applicant has a number of family members who are citizens and residents of 
Saudi Arabia.  Applicant’s father, his mother, four of his five brothers, four sisters, four 
brothers-in-law and three sisters-in-law, and numerous extended family members, 
including aunts, uncles, and grandmothers.  They are happy for the Applicant, and 
consider him lucky to be able to live and work in the United States. 
 
 Applicant’s father is now retired for eight years, but before that was employed by 
the state-owned oil company of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Applicant’s mother has 
always been a housewife.  Applicant calls his parents once or twice every two weeks.  
(Tr. p. 40.) 
 
 Applicant has five brothers.  Four of them are citizens and residents of Saudi 
Arabia, and one is a dual citizen of the United States and Saudi Arabia.  His oldest 
brother is an accountant.  Another brother is a banker, and two are doctors.  The 
youngest brother is a middle school or high school student.  Applicant speaks to his 
brothers by phone about once a month or so.  (Tr. p. 45.)   
 
 Applicant has four sisters, all of them are citizens and residents of Saudi Arabia.  
One is an English teacher, who is married to an Engineer, who is receiving a 
scholarship from Saudi Aramco (the oil company Applicant’s father used to work for).  
Another sister is a dentist.  She is married to a male nurse.  His next sister, recently 
graduated from school and is looking for a job.  She is currently a child care provider.  
Her husband is a dentist. Applicant’s youngest sister is still in school, trying to become a 
doctor.  Her husband is an Engineer.  (Tr. p. 48.)  
 
 Applicant currently earns about $89,000 annually, and lives comfortably on that 
salary.  He has no delinquent debts.  (Tr. p. 55.)  He has about $90,000 in savings in his 
personal bank account, and about $50,000 in his 401k retirement account.  (Tr. p. 56.) 
 
 Applicant has received security training from his employer, and is aware of his 
foreign contacts and the possibility of foreign influence.  Applicant has never been 
approached or confronted by anyone seeking to obtain protected information from him 
on any level.  He states that he would never reveal any protected information to any 
foreign entity seeking to obtain information under any circumstances.  If he is 
 
4 
 
threatened with death, or if someone in his family or his friends are threatened with 
death, he states that he will never disclose U.S. protected information.  (Tr. p. 58.)  
Applicant is currently a dual citizen of Saudi Arabia and the United States.  He 
maintains his Saudi Arabian citizenship because he wants to make sure that he is able 
to pass easily through customs when he travels to Saudi Arabia to see his family.  (Tr. 
p. 62.) 
 
 Performance Evaluations of the Applicant for 2016, 2017, and 2018, are 
favorable and reflect that he has always either “met expectations” or “exceeded 
expectations” in every category.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A, B, and C.) 
 
 In assessing the heightened risk created as a result of a security clearance, the 
Applicant’s ties to a hostile country are important.  However, even countries friendly to 
the United States have attempted to gain unauthorized access to classified information. 
Under the particular facts of this case, I have taken administrative notice of the 
information provided concerning the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Saudi Arabia is a 
monarchy ruled by King Salman bin Abdulaziz al Saud, who is both head of state and 
head of government.   The government bases its legitimacy on its interpretation of 
shalia (Islamic Law) and the 1992 Basic Law, which specifies that the rulers of the 
country shall be male descendants of the founder, King Abudulaziz bin Abdulrahman Al 
Saud.  The most significant human rights issues include unlawful killings, including 
execution for other than the most serious offenses and without requisite due process; 
torture; arbitrary arrest and detention, including of lawyers, human rights activists; and 
antigovernment reformists; political prisoners; arbitrary interference with privacy; 
restrictions on freedoms of peaceful assembly, association, movement, and religion; 
citizen’s lack of ability and legal means to choose their government through free and fair 
elections; trafficking in person; violence and official gender discrimination against 
women, although new women’s rights initiatives were announced and criminalization of 
same restrictions on freedoms of expression, including on the internet, and the 
criminalization of libel; and antigovernment reformists.  The U.S. Department of State 
has issued a Level 2 Travel Advisory regarding Saudi Arabia advising U.S. travelers to 
“exercise caution” while visiting Saudi Arabia due to terrorism and the threat of missile 
attacks on civilian targets.  Terrorist groups continue plotting possible attacks in Saudi 
Arabia.  Terrorists may attack with little or no warning, targeting tourist locations, 
transportations hubs, markets/shopping malls and local government facilities.  (HE.1.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
 
5 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference 
for a foreign country over the United States, then he may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States.  Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
 
6 
 
judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it.  By itself: the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment.  The same is true for a U.S. citizen’s exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 including: 
 
(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference. 
 
Applicant maintains his Saudi Arabian passport to be able to travel more 
conveniently to see his parents in Saudi Arabia, and for no other reason. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
7 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s foreign family members include his mother, father, five brothers, four 
sisters, aunts, uncles, grandmothers, cousins, and other extended family, who are 
citizens and residents of Saudi Arabia.  Based upon the evidence presented, they do 
not threaten or influence Applicant’s choice of interest as a native-born United States 
citizen.  Applicant’s contact with them is casual, minimal, and not out of the ordinary.  
They have no interest in or knowledge of Applicant’s security clearance or work product.  
All of Applicant’s family in Saudi Arabia are either in school or are established 
professionals in their own right.  They clearly do not need the Applicant for upward 
mobility or financial support.  Under the particular circumstances here, the risk-benefit 
analysis is applicable, and this contact does not pose a significant security risk to the 
U.S. government.  There is nothing here that may manipulate or induce the Applicant to 
help a foreign person or government in a way that is inconsistent with the U.S. interests.  
All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States.  He is a proud American-born citizen 
and has worked hard since high school to learn the American culture and its ways in 
order to assimilate into the American lifestyle comfortably.  Applicant feels lucky to be 
an American, and only for the fact that his parents and siblings are of Saudi Arabian 
ancestry and reside in Saudi Arabia has this issue even surfaced.  Applicant has not 
subjected himself to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest from his connection with his family.  However, the evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
8 
 
 
 The nature of Applicant’s relationships with his family do not pose a security risk.  
There is no conflict of interest.  No one in Applicant’s immediate family has ever been 
the victim of terrorism in Saudi Arabia.  His family is not disturbed with where Applicant 
lives, what Applicant does, nor do they show any interest in the Applicant or his work.  
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen and his relationship with his family does not result 
in a divided allegiance.  Full mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), has been 
established in regard to his family members.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Under the particular facts of this case, Applicant’s familial Saudi Arabian 
connections do not pose a risk to the U.S. government.  Applicant is an intelligent 
American citizen whose only connection with Saudi Arabia at this point in his life is his 
parental upbringing, which occurred from the early age of two months old through high 
school.  Since then, he has been educated in the United States, and is committed to the 
American culture.  He is now dedicated to living his dream of developing technology for 
the American government.         
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.h:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
