 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
    
             
 
 
                   
     
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01374 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
May 10, 2019 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 24, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On July 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal 
conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
On August 30, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated October 22, 2018, was provided to him by letter on October 25, 
2018. Applicant received the FORM on October 30, 2018. He was afforded a period of 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not submit any information within the 30-day period. On January 30, 2019, 
the case was assigned to me. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel amended the SOR withdrawing ¶ 2.a., the sole allegation 
under personal conduct. Accordingly, the following discussion will focus on the 
remaining security concern under financial considerations. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background Information1
Applicant is a 31-year-old diplomatic security officer employed by a defense 
contractor since August 2015. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his 
current employment. He previously held a security clearance when he served in the 
U.S. Army, discussed below.   
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 2005, and was awarded an associate’s 
degree in 2016. He served in the U.S. Army from 2007 to 2014, and was honorably 
discharged. Applicant has never married, and lives with a cohabitant. He has two minor 
children.  
 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s 11 delinquent SOR debts, totaling approximating $39,000, are 
established by his September 2015 and April 2018 credit reports, as well as by his 
Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interviews conducted between May 
2016 and March 2018 (OPM PSI). (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – l.k; Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems trace back to approximately 2015. He stated he 
was unable to pay his bills on time because of military life, and because he never had a 
real sense of responsibility when it came to paying bills. (Item 6)  
 
 Applicant denied all of his debts except for SOR ¶ 1.a. He provided various 
explanations as to why he was not responsible for the remaining ten debts. However, he 
failed to provide any mitigating documentation; not only for the one debt he admitted, 
but also for the ten debts he denied. (Item 2) 
 
Department Counsel’s FORM provided specific shortcomings of Applicant’s 
answer. She further emphasized long-standing DOHA case law that it is necessary for 
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicants to provide mitigating documentation. As noted, Applicant did not submit any 
additional information within the 30-day period following receipt of his FORM. 
  
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a clearance favorable 
decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists seven potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the 
facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have 
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 
2(d). Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is 
presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information 
suggesting his long-standing financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain 
about his suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national 
interest is the principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be 
resolved against Applicant. 
 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to 
submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information, and in relying on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish 
mitigation, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    WITHDRAWN 
  
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
