 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00629 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen M. Jewell, Esq.  
 
 
05/03/2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s history of alcohol involvement includes a June 2015 DUI with a high 
blood-alcohol content, a 2015 diagnosis of a severe alcohol use disorder, and evidence 
of continued alcohol consumption. It is Applicant’s burden to mitigate the security 
concerns established by his actions and his serious alcohol use disorder. He has 
resumed drinking, despite his diagnosis. He has indicated an intent to resume 
counseling, as recommended to avoid relapse or alcohol abuse, but has not yet done 
so. Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate Guideline G security 
concerns. Eligibility for continued access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 8, 2017. On 
June 7, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns 
under Guideline G, alcohol consumption. The DOD CAF took the action under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992, as amended), and the Security 
 
2 
 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 14, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge of the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).1 
His Answer included 11 enclosures (Ans. Encl. 1-11), included in the record without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on November 13, 2018. On November 21, 
2018, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for December 12, 2018.  
 
The hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through G were also admitted without objection. Applicant and five 
witnesses testified. I left the record open after the hearing to provide Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted five additional exhibits, 
which were marked and admitted without objection as AE H through L. The record 
closed on January 10, 2019.2 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e. He admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d in 
part and denied them in part.3 His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He is a retired U.S. Air Force officer and F-16 pilot who 
is employed by a defense contractor. He and his wife have been married since 1995. 
They have three children, ages 22, 21, and 10. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in 
1993 and a master’s degree in 2005. He served in the Air Force from 1993 to 2016, 
retiring as a lieutenant colonel. Rated as a “command pilot,” he had over 2,500 flying 
hours and more than 300 hours flying over combat zones in Iraq and Afghanistan. He 
has worked for his employer in the defense industry since May 2016, as the deputy 
director of one of the company’s divisions. He has held a security clearance for 26 years 
                                                          
1 When he answered the SOR, Applicant did not formally “admit” or “deny” the allegations. I noted this in 
an e-mail to counsel before the hearing, and Applicant addressed each allegation during hearing 
preliminaries. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) I; Tr. 10-14)  
 
2 Post-Hearing e-mail correspondence between myself and the parties is marked as HE IV. On December 
21, 2019, when he provided Applicant’s post-hearing submissions, counsel requested “an indefinite delay 
in your ruling in order to provide ongoing updates” from Applicant’s counselor. I declined to hold the 
record open indefinitely for submission of evidence on an ongoing basis. DOD Directive 5220.6 ¶ E.3.1.10 
states that “[t]he Administrative Judge . . . shall conduct all proceedings in a fair, timely, and orderly 
manner.” (Emphasis added) Additionally, ¶ E3.1.25 states that “The Administrative Judge shall make a 
written clearance decision in a timely manner . . .” An applicant is not entitled to a delayed or deferred 
adjudication of his or her security eligibility. ISCR Case No. 10-07892 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 7, 2011); ISCR 
Case No. 09-02926 at 2 (App. Bd. May 11, 2010). 
 
3 Applicant’s partial denials as to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d largely concerned the fact that the allegations 
misidentified the facility where he was treated and diagnosed. He otherwise admitted the substance of the 
allegations. (Tr. 12-13, 28-29) 
 
3 
 
since he was commissioned as an Air Force officer. (Tr. 16, 53, 122-123, 159-162; Ans. 
Encl. 11; SCA; AE G) 
 
 Applicant discussed his historical drinking pattern in his background interview. He 
was a social and weekend drinker in college. He drank alcohol sporadically in the Air 
Force until about 2012, when his drinking increased significantly after his wife became 
seriously ill. Applicant dealt with the resulting stress by drinking frequently as a coping 
mechanism. He said in his background interview that during this period, he consumed 
four to six glasses of beer or wine on a daily basis. (Tr. 165; GE 2 at 12) At hearing, 
Applicant testified that his drinking became “unhealthy” sometime in early 2015, and 
that he was drinking habitually, four or five times a week at the time. (Tr. 145-147) He 
said no one came to him at the time and said he was drinking too much, nor did he 
realize that himself. (Tr. 190-191) 
 
  In June 2015, Applicant was stationed at a military base near where he now 
lives, in State 1. He went to another state, State 2, to attend a conference. The night 
before he was to return, he consumed eight to ten alcoholic drinks over a five-hour 
period, alone in his hotel room. He had been working out beforehand, and had nothing 
else to eat or drink. (Tr. 162-164; GE 2 at 11) 
 
  Applicant went to sleep after midnight. He woke at about 3:30 am and drove to 
the airport for his return flight. While en route, he became disoriented and entered an 
interstate highway by driving the wrong way down the exit ramp. He was stopped by 
police after he was seen driving eastbound in a westbound lane. (Tr. 123-125, 163-164; 
GE 2 at 11; GE 7 at 1) 
 
  Applicant was administered a breathalyzer test at the scene and registered a 
blood alcohol content (BAC) of .225. Results of a blood test later showed a BAC of .28. 
He was arrested and initially charged with driving under the influence (DUI) and 
reckless driving under State 2 law. (SOR ¶ 1.a) (Tr. 125; GE 7 at 1; GE 2 at 7, 11)  
 
 Applicant immediately disclosed his arrest to his command. Upon returning, he 
was referred to the Air Force Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention Treatment (ADAPT) 
program and diagnosed in early July 2015 with a severe alcohol use disorder after 
meeting 8 of the 11 criteria for alcohol use disorder under the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V). (Tr. 126, 131, 144, GE 4 at 1)  
 
 Applicant then entered recommended inpatient treatment at the Substance 
Abuse Rehabilitation Program (SARP) at a local Navy hospital. (SOR ¶ 1.b)4 While his 
attendance was voluntary, he was also told that if he chose not to enter inpatient alcohol 
treatment, the Air Force would begin administrative separation proceedings. While he 
                                                          
4 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol use disorder, severe, while in inpatient 
treatment at the Navy’s SARP program, when in fact, the initial diagnosis was made during his initial 
alcohol evaluation by Air Force ADAPT providers. (Tr. 131; GE 4 at 2). While there is no documentation of 
SARP’s diagnosis, Applicant testified that SARP accepted the diagnosis he received from the Air Force, 
“and just put me into treatment.” (Tr. 150) 
 
 
4 
 
initially preferred outpatient treatment, he also recognized that he had a problem with 
alcohol, so he was “easily convinced and ready to get help.” (Tr. 126-127, 130, 135, 
149-150, 166; GE 1 at 38, 46).  
 
 Applicant was in inpatient treatment at SARP for 30 days in July and August 
2015. He was considered “an active and motivated member of treatment groups,” and 
he successfully completed inpatient treatment in August 2015. (Tr. 131, 151, GE 4 at 2; 
GE 5; Ans. Encl. 3) 
 
 Applicant’s continuing care and aftercare plan developed by ADAPT in August 
2015, which he acknowledged by signature, detailed certain requirements over the next 
12 months. They included: 1) abstinence from alcohol; 2) participation in at least one to 
three self-help group meetings per week (Alcoholics Anonymous, or “AA”); 3) weekly 
follow-up counseling with his ADAPT counselor; and 4) participation in a formalized 
continuing care group on a weekly basis for the next 12 months. (Tr. 131-132, 151-153; 
GE 5 at 2-3) 
 
 Applicant testified at hearing that his abstinence “was unrelated to the treatment” 
he received at SARP, but was instead “related to me wanting to fly again.” (Tr. 151; 
Ans. Enc. 3) The documentary record says otherwise, however, as abstinence from 
alcohol is the first requirement listed in the ADAPT program. (GE 5 at 2) 
 
 After inpatient treatment, Applicant transitioned to the ADAPT continuing-care 
abstinence group, where he continued treatment on a bi-monthly basis. He met with a 
counselor to discuss treatment goals (maintaining abstinence from alcohol, improving 
stress management skills and improving his marriage). He attended meetings with a 
local alcohol-abstinence support group, what he called “AA for aviators,” became more 
engaged at church, and began marital counseling. (Tr. 131-133, 167-169; GE 4 at 2; 
Ans. Encl. 3) 
 
 In September 2015, Applicant received a letter of reprimand from his 
commanding officer as a result of his arrest. (SOR ¶ 1.c) The letter noted that, in 
addition to the civilian charges of DUI and reckless driving, he was also in violation of 
Article 111 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for drunken operation of a 
vehicle. (GE 7 at 1) A determination was made to adjudicate Applicant’s DUI in State 2 
criminal court, so Applicant was not formally charged by military authorities. (Tr. 126-
128; GE 2 at 7)  
 
 In October 2015, after two months in continuing care, Applicant transitioned to 
the aftercare phase of the ADAPT program. (SOR ¶ 1.d)5 During this phase, he met 
monthly with his ADAPT program manager, an Air Force captain in the Biomedical 
Service Corps (BSC). He also continued attending other support groups, including the 
                                                          
5 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant received aftercare treatment with ADAPT at the Navy hospital from 
August to October 2015, and was again diagnosed with alcohol use disorder, severe. In fact, Applicant 
began the Aftercare program in October 2015, after two months in the “continuing care abstinence 
group,” and the program was run by the Air Force, not the Navy. Applicant said he did not recall a “new 
diagnosis” at that stage. (Tr. 152)  
 
5 
 
“AA for aviators” program. He abstained from alcohol throughout the program, verified 
by lab tests. (Tr. 131-133, 154, 167-169; GE 4 at 2; GE 6; GE 7 at 3-6; Ans. Encl. 3)  
 
 In February 2016, Applicant requested an updated alcohol evaluation from 
ADAPT in order to maintain his flight status. His DSM-V diagnosis at that time was 
alcohol use disorder, severe, in early remission, because he had no demonstrated 
symptoms for “longer than three months but less than one year.” (GE 4 at 3-4)  
 
 The ADAPT providers noted that, given the “beneficial and socially supportive 
nature” of Applicant’s participation in marital therapy and the “AA for aviators” group,  
  
it is recommended that he continue to engage in these therapeutic outlets 
in the future (i.e., post-ADAPT treatment), in order to continue his upward 
prognostic trajectory and best assist him in the maintenance of his 
abstinence as well as the continued remission of his condition.6  
 
 Given this evidence, and given Applicant’s stated desire to maintain a sober 
lifestyle and to continue progressing towards recovery, his prognosis was regarded as 
excellent. It was estimated that in the absence of relapse, his condition would eventually 
meet the criteria for alcohol use disorder, severe, in sustained remission if he 
demonstrated no symptoms for over a year. (GE 4 at 4)  
 
 Applicant was allowed to maintain his flight status. (Tr. 132-133, 161, 170) He 
was subject to a retirement grade determination but was allowed to retire from the Air 
Force as a lieutenant colonel in early May 2016.7 (GE 2 at 7; Ans. Encl. 5; AE A – AE C)  
 
 Applicant did not complete the Air Force’s ADAPT aftercare program because he 
retired from the Air Force. (Tr. 137, 181) The record does not indicate that Applicant 
pursued a civilian alternative to the ADAPT program once he retired.  
 
 Applicant’s DUI case in State 2 remained pending until February 2017, when he 
pleaded guilty to one count of DUI, extreme BAC, .15 – .19. The remaining charges, a) 
DUI; b) DUI – liquor BAC .08 or more; c) DUI extreme BAC .20 or more; and d) reckless 
driving) were dismissed. (GE 3; GE 1 at 40-41) Applicant was sentenced to 12 months 
of unsupervised probation, which he completed. He was ordered to pay about $3,000 in 
fines, fees, and costs, which he did in October 2017. He had an ignition interlock device 
installed on his car from May 2017 to May 2018, and had no violations. He attended a 
Mothers Against Drunk Driving panel. He was not under any pre-trial restrictions from 
State 2 authorities before he pleaded guilty, and was not required to abstain from 
alcohol while on probation. (Tr. 128-129, 155-158, 171-175; GE 1 at 41-42; GE 3; AE H)  
                                                          
6 GE 4 at 4 (emphasis added) 
 
7 In March 2016, DOD CAF issued Applicant a Memorandum of Intent (MOI) to revoke his security 
clearance, alleging security concerns due to the DUI arrest. As a result, his security clearance was 
suspended. Applicant responded to the MOI on March 15, 2016. (GE 8) Because he retired from the Air 
Force soon thereafter, it does not appear that the March 2016 MOI was ever adjudicated. (Tr. 189-190) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant resumed drinking after leaving the Air Force. He said in his background 
interview that he resumed drinking in June 2016 (about one year after the DUI). (GE 2 
at 12) At hearing, he said he resumed drinking around his birthday, in September 2016 
(about 15 months after the DUI). (Tr. 134-136, 158, 176-177) 
 
 Applicant testified that his current pattern of consumption is to have two to three 
drinks about two or three times a week. He described his pattern as social drinking with 
family and friends, such as on weekends watching football, and a drink on special 
occasions, such as birthdays or holidays. (Tr. 137-138, 177-178; GE 2 at 2, 12) He said 
when he is on business travel, he takes customers out and will “probably have a couple 
more drinks than my average.” (Tr. 138)  
 
 Applicant’s renewed consumption of alcohol is alleged as a security concern, as 
it post-dates his treatment for alcohol use disorder. (SOR ¶ 1.e) In an affidavit submitted 
with his Answer to the SOR, he reported that:  
 
[Applicant’s mental health doctor during ADAPT treatment] knew I was 
abstaining from alcohol during treatment and that I was hitting or 
exceeding all of my progress goals. My doctors also knew I had not made 
a decision as to whether I would abstain forever, and complete abstinence 
was never a mandatory part of my long-term treatment plan. In fact, I 
recall several treatment sessions where we discussed that living sober did 
not necessarily mean living dry.8 
 
 Applicant also stated in his affidavit that he was required to abstain from alcohol 
only as long as he was on flight orders, though this was “not an official part of my 
treatment plan.” (Ans. Enc. 3 at 2) He asserted in his affidavit that his resumed social 
drinking has been safe and responsible, and without any adverse issues, either 
personally or professionally. Applicant also attested that “my responsible consumption 
of alcohol is completely in line with my treatment plan, as explained to me by my 
doctors when I completed treatment.” (Ans. Encl. 3 at 2) He testified that he was never 
told by his doctors that he could never drink alcohol again. (Tr. 133, 158, 171) Applicant 
was not told by anyone else that he is drinking too much. (Tr. 191) These statements 
are unsupported by updated corroborating documentation. Applicant did not indicate 
that he currently drinks to intoxication, and he reported no additional alcohol-related 
offenses or “negative incidents.” (Tr. 138, 176; GE 2)  
 
 After retiring from the Air Force, Applicant continued marital counseling. He also 
supported his wife as they sought medical care at various hospitals for her medical 
conditions, as they raised their three children. He began a busy travel schedule in his 
current job. Applicant attended the “AA for aviators” support group for about a year and 
benefitted from it, but stopped going in part because it was geographically difficult to get 
there. (Tr. 182-183: GE 2 at 12) Applicant offered no evidence at hearing that he is 
                                                          
8 Ans. Encl. 3; see also Tr. 133-134.  
 
7 
 
currently participating in AA or any similar counseling group, nor did he indicate 
sustained involvement with a formal support network to help him address his drinking. 
 
 Applicant testified that after the DUI, he was prohibited from driving in the county 
in State 2 where the offense occurred. (Tr. 174) Shortly before his DOHA hearing, he 
was on a business trip in another state, and was told that his driver’s license was about 
to expire, which he had not noticed. Even though he had lived in State 1 for several 
years, he still had a driver’s license from State 3, where he had served in the Air Force 
from 2007 to 2010. (GE 1 at 17) When he sought to get a new license, he learned that 
his State 3 driver’s license had been suspended as a result of the DUI. Applicant 
testified that he was unaware of this, and said that he did not drive until his license was 
renewed. (Tr. 183-188) 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant presented documentation from State 3 of an alcohol 
assessment he underwent in November 2018 in order to have his driving privileges 
renewed there (a prerequisite for getting a valid license in State 1). He testified that he 
was issued a valid driver’s license from State 1 a few days before his hearing. (Tr. 183-
188) 
 
 The assessment is from a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in State 1. (AE 
J; AE L) She met with Applicant for one hour, in November 2018. (AE I) The 
assessment summarizes the procedural history of the DUI case in State 2, Applicant’s 
treatment and counseling, retirement from the Air Force, and the requirements of his 
probation. The assessment does not mention Applicant’s June 2015 diagnosis of a 
severe alcohol use disorder, or the February 2016 diagnosis that his disorder was in 
early remission at that time. The documentation does not include an updated diagnosis 
of Applicant’s alcohol use disorder.  
 
 With respect to a prognosis, the assessor finds that Applicant “did not present as 
a risk to himself or others regarding the use of alcohol.” The LPC found that Applicant 
demonstrated that “he is managing his stress level and appears to be functioning within 
normal limits at this time.” (AE J at 15/26) 
 
 The assessor noted, however, that a “plan should be in place for [Applicant] to 
manage his stress levels and not [succumb] to relapse or alcohol abuse.” (AE J at 
13/26) Counseling was recommended to help him manage his stress and his wife’s 
health issues. (AE J at 16/26) After the hearing, Applicant e-mailed the LPC and said he 
wanted to begin counseling with her. (AE K) There is no indication of additional 
counseling with the LPC as of the date the record closed. 
 
 In his testimony, Applicant acknowledged his poor judgment the night of the DUI. 
He referred to the event as “life-changing.” He intends to continue making “good 
personal decisions” and relying on his support network of family, friends and counselors 
going forward. He is also very patriotic, and understands the security significance of his 
actions. He accepted responsibility for his actions and was remorseful. (Tr. 123, 139-
143)  
 
8 
 
 Two witnesses from Applicant’s current employment testified. W itness 1 (W1) is 
a senior lead engineer for Applicant’s employer. Applicant is one of his supervisors, but 
they work in separate geographic areas. Witness 2 (W2) is the facility security officer 
(FSO) for Applicant’s employer and several of its subsidiaries. (AE D) He served in the 
Air Force for 30 years, retiring as a master sergeant. Both W1 and W2 have had 
clearances for many years. Applicant’s work performance is “beyond reproach” and 
“stellar.” Applicant has been upfront about the DUI, and uses it as a cautionary tale for 
others. The incident had a “huge impact on him.” W1 and W2 are aware that Applicant 
abstained from alcohol for a year and has resumed drinking. As the FSO, W2 has had 
interaction with others who have had alcohol issues. He noted no “telltale” signs of 
alcohol issues with Applicant. He said it would be a security concern if Applicant had 
repeated alcohol issues, but he had none, but for the DUI. Both W1 and W 2 rate 
Applicant a “10” (on a 1-10 scale) for national security trustworthiness and suitability. 
(Tr. 37-49; (Tr. 50-55; AE D) 
 
 Two other witnesses testified who had firsthand knowledge of the DUI and its 
aftermath. Witness 3 (W3) and Witness 4 (W4) are both retired Air Force colonels. W3 
was the deputy division chief at the Air Force command where Applicant served at the 
time of the DUI. W4 was Applicant’s supervisor at the time, and he issued Applicant GE 
7, the letter of reprimand. Applicant’s performance at the command was “outstanding” 
and “exemplary.” Both W3 and W4 recommended that Applicant retain his rank at 
retirement. (AE A; AE B) W3 testified that he has “absolute faith and trust” in Applicant, 
and he provides a valuable service to the Air Force in his position. W3 regards Applicant 
as a “fine gentleman.” (Tr. 71-108) 
 
 W4 is aware of Applicant’s participation in alcohol treatment. W4 said that 
Applicant’s professionalism “never wavered” after the DUI. He said Applicant was 
forthcoming, admitted his mistakes, and wanted to move forward from them. W4 
believes Applicant has learned “a tremendously difficult lesson.” Applicant’s judgment, 
trustworthiness, and reliability are “upstanding [and] of the highest order” and he 
believes Applicant should have a clearance. (Tr. 89-108; AE B; AE E) 
  
 Witness 5 (W5) is Applicant’s brother. He testified by phone. He is a police 
sergeant in a large U.S. city. He is professionally experienced with the importance of 
confidentiality, privacy, and the protection of sensitive information. W5 testified that 
Applicant is a loving father and family man with excellent character. (Tr. 111-113) W5 is 
aware of the DUI, but has never known Applicant to otherwise behave irresponsibly with 
alcohol. W5 is aware of Applicant’s alcohol treatment, his one year of abstinence, and 
the fact that he has resumed drinking. It does not cause W5 concern with respect to 
Applicant’s ability to safeguard secrets. W5 considers his brother a role model and 
“moral compass.” He has always admired Applicant’s patriotism, dedication, and 
commitment to his family. (Tr. 111-119)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.9 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”10 
 
 The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set forth in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
                                                          
9 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988)  
 
10 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
10 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency 
of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist; psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) or alcohol use disorder;  
 
 (e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and  
 
(f) alcohol consumption which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder.  
  
 Applicant was a social and weekend drinker until about 2012, when his drinking 
increased significantly after his wife’s chronic medical condition began to cause stress 
and strain on both Applicant and his wife, and he turned to alcohol as a coping 
mechanism. By 2015, he was having several drinks, several days a week, and reached 
what he acknowledged was an unhealthy level of drinking. His June 2015 arrest for DUI 
occurred after a night of binge drinking. He was arrested and charged with multiple DUI 
offenses, and pleaded guilty to one count of DUI, extreme BAC, .15 – .19. AG ¶¶ 22(a) 
and 22(c) apply. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d concern Applicant’s diagnosis of a severe alcohol use 
disorder, severe, and his related inpatient treatment and participation in aftercare. 
Applicant admits that he was initially diagnosed by Air Force ADAPT providers during 
his initial assessment after the DUI, and that the diagnosis was accepted by the Navy 
SARP personnel. Applicant’s inpatient treatment and aftercare do not constitute 
disqualifying conduct, and no AGs apply. The diagnosis itself, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, 
is established, and it satisfies AG ¶ 22(d). 
  
 Applicant testified that he did not receive a “new diagnosis” from ADAPT 
providers, either during continuing care or aftercare, after he left inpatient treatment in 
August 2015. Nor does the record contain any such documentation, either from the 
Navy (as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d) or from Air Force ADAPT providers. Even if it were 
established, such a diagnosis would largely have confirmed the initial diagnosis in SOR 
¶ 1.b, made only a few weeks or months earlier. As such, it would be essentially 
duplicative. Regardless, SOR ¶ 1.d is resolved for Applicant.  
 
 
11 
 
 Applicant’s letter of reprimand, while a direct and negative consequence of his 
DUI, also does not constitute disqualifying conduct under Guideline G. SOR ¶ 1.c is 
therefore found for Applicant.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a security concern because Applicant “continue[s] to consume 
alcohol, notwithstanding [his] treatment for a condition diagnosed as Alcohol Use 
Disorder.” Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.e. SOR ¶ 1.e does not allege that Applicant’s 
resumed consumption of alcohol was contrary to treatment recommendations; indeed, 
he asserted that he was only required to abstain from alcohol only in order to maintain 
his flying status. Nevertheless, Applicant’s ADAPT providers recommended in February 
2016 that he continue with therapy and the “AA for aviators” program, including after 
ADAPT, “in order to continue his upward prognostic trajectory and best assist him in the 
maintenance of his abstinence as well as the continued remission of his condition.” (GE 
4 at 4). Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence that he followed these 
recommendations. AG ¶¶ 22(e) and 22(f) therefore apply to SOR ¶ 1.e.  
  
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations.  
 
 The most recent diagnosis in the record is from February 2016, when ADAPT 
providers concluded that Applicant’s severe alcohol use disorder was in early remission. 
This was based on his ongoing abstinence, participation in counseling, as well as a 
stated desire to maintain a sober lifestyle and to continue progressing towards recovery. 
He had an excellent prognosis for continued progress, and he would eventually be “in 
sustained remission” if he continued to demonstrate no symptoms for over a year.  
 
 
12 
 
 Applicant did not complete the Air Force’s ADAPT program and did not find a 
civilian alternative. He was in the “AA for aviators” program for a time but is not 
participating currently. He therefore did not follow the therapeutic recommendations of 
his ADAPT providers after leaving the program. He also resumed drinking, thereby 
stopping the “upward prognostic trajectory” towards sustained remission of his 
condition. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply.  
 
 After the hearing, Applicant contacted the LPC who did the assessment he 
needed to renew his driver’s license, and indicated an interest in pursuing counseling 
with her. But that counseling had not begun when the record closed, so AG ¶ 23(c) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant resumed drinking alcohol about a year after his inpatient treatment and 
diagnosis. He resumed drinking in either June 2016, as he indicated in his background 
interview, or at the latest in September 2016 (his birthday), as he testified. His 
subsequent drinking pattern has been to have two or three drinks at social and family 
occasions, two or three times a week. He also acknowledged consuming “a couple 
more drinks than my average” while out with business customers. The February 2016 
diagnosis was based largely on abstinence as well as continued participation in 
counseling and a stated desire for continued sobriety. Applicant’s resumed drinking 
undercuts the favorable prognosis he had at the time, and has not been shown to be in 
accordance with treatment recommendations.  
 
 The November 2018 assessment does not address Applicant’s diagnosis 
specifically. The assessor found that Applicant is not at risk to himself or others 
regarding use of alcohol. This is similar to a favorable prognosis, though the LPC does 
not call it that specifically. However, as the assessment also acknowledges, Applicant 
needs a safety net of counseling to manage stress and to avoid succumbing to relapse 
and alcohol abuse. That safety net is not in place, though Applicant has expressed a 
desire to pursue counseling. Without established compliance with such counseling, the 
risk of relapse remains, as the assessor noted. This is particularly so since Applicant 
has resumed drinking despite his diagnosis, and despite the recommendation to 
continue counseling and abstinence after ADAPT.  
 
 Applicant has had a single DUI, though a very serious one. There is no indication 
that he drinks to intoxication, and there have been no further alcohol-related offenses 
since. Even so, there is ample Appeal Board precedent for finding that resumed 
drinking, even moderate drinking, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, severe, and 
against clinical recommendations, can support a conclusion that an applicant has not 
demonstrated sufficient rehabilitation to overcome the security concerns about his 
alcohol involvement.11 
  
 Applicant’s resumed social drinking is against the clinical advice of his ADAPT 
providers, and he did not sufficiently document that he has received a subsequent 
diagnosis under which his established pattern of modified consumption of alcohol is in 
                                                          
11 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 18-00782 at 3 (App. Bd., Feb. 15, 2019); ISCR Case No. 14-05002 at 4 
(App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2016); ISCR Case No. 04-10457 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2007). 
 
13 
 
accordance with treatment recommendations. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and (b) do not fully apply. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the alcohol involvement security 
concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Having observed his demeanor at hearing, I do not doubt that Applicant has been 
significantly affected by these events. I am also mindful of his brave and honorable 
service in uniform for many years and as an F-16 pilot under stressful, dangerous 
conditions, including over combat zones. I also considered the strong whole-person 
evidence provided by his character witnesses.  
 
But it is Applicant’s burden to mitigate the security concerns established by his 
actions and his serious alcohol use disorder. On this record, that is not established. 
Applicant resumed drinking, despite his diagnosis. While his drinking is otherwise 
moderate, he did not meet his burden to establish at this time that the security concerns 
stemming from his alcohol involvement are fully resolved, or are unlikely to recur. As the 
assessor noted, Applicant needs to have a safety net in place to manage his stress 
levels and to avoid succumbing to relapse or alcohol abuse. He has indicated an intent 
to resume counseling, but has not yet done so. With time, Applicant may establish a 
sufficient track record of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations, aided by demonstrated participation in sustained 
counseling. If so, reconsideration may be warranted at a later date. At this time, 
however, I am not persuaded that Applicant has provided sufficient evidence to 
establish that his serious alcohol issues are unlikely to recur, and are no longer a 
 
14 
 
security concern. Overall, the record evidence therefore leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s continued eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant continued eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for continued access to classified information is denied. 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
