1 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01607 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government:  Eric Price, Esq., Department Counsel 
Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
05/07/2019
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
Curry, Marc, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns generated by his 
family members who are citizens and residents of Iraq. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On July 13, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position, effective June 8, 2017. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DOD adjudicators 
could not make the affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant or continue his security clearance. It recommended that his 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On August 28, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, admitting all of the 
allegations, and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 
2018. On January 17, 2019, DOHA issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the case for 
March 4, 2019. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel submitted three documents for admission that I marked as Government 
Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 3. Applicant submitted 13 exhibits, incorporated into the record 
as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 13. 
 
I took administrative notice, at Department Counsel’s request, of the facts 
encapsulated within seven source documents, identified as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I 
through HE VII. Also, I received a copy of the discovery letter mailed from Department 
Counsel to Applicant, incorporating it into the record as HE VIII. The transcript was 
received on February 26, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old single man. He was born, raised, and educated 
through high school, in Iraq, immigrating to the United States in 2010, and becoming a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2015. (Tr. 31) He earned an associate’s degree in database 
management in 2017. (Tr. 42) 
 
 Between 2003 and 2010, while living in Iraq, Applicant worked for a defense 
subcontractor that provided supplies to the U.S. forces. (Tr. 30)  According to his team 
leader, he was “an ideal employee as well as an intelligent and hard-working individual.” 
(AE E)  
 
In 2010, Applicant applied for, and was granted, a special immigration visa to 
immigrate to the United States after someone in his community in Iraq discovered that 
he was supporting the United States mission, leading to death threats. (Tr. 31) After 
immigrating to the United States, Applicant worked a variety of jobs before returning to 
the defense field and taking a job supporting U.S. military advisors as an Arabic role 
player in 2017. (AE F) According to his supervisor, his training was instrumental to the 
program, as his “ability to think quickly and . . . grasp . . . the cultural nuances frequently 
encountered . . . made him an invaluable asset to the team.” (AE F) Per a coworker, 
Applicant is dependable, duty-driven, and honest.” (AE D) He was the most popular 
trainer on base, as his “innate knowledge and native language skills facilitated the 
training scenarios and significantly enhanced the realism of the pre-deployment training  
. . . conducted for thousands of . . . security forces annually.” (AE D) According to the 
senior program manager, Applicant “demonstrated a dedication to duty and an ability to 
be trusted in all circumstances.” (AE C) 
 
In July 2018, Applicant began working for his current employer. He is a linguist, 
working on location abroad. (Tr. 52) According to the site lead, “he is the type of 
employee that every manager wants to have,” and his “professionalism has directly 
contributed to the success of the synergy between the Coalition forces and their Iraqi 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
counterparts.” (AE H) In February 2019, Applicant received a certificate of recognition 
for his outstanding service as a linguist in the field. (AE K) 
 
 Applicant is equally well-respected in his community. A friend characterizes him 
as “a selfless person who believes in helping others in need [regardless] of race, origin, 
or religion. (AE J) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Iraq. (Answer at 1) They are 
tailors. (GE 1 at 27) Applicant communicates with his mother by phone approximately 
once every month, and they communicate on a family online chatroom app approximate 
three days per week. (Tr. 41, 68) Applicant’s father is “old school,” and prefers not to 
use a cell phone often. (Tr. 67) Moreover, they “do not get along very well.” They talk on 
occasion when Applicant calls his mother, and she gives his father the phone to say 
hello. (Tr. 68) In 2016, Applicant gifted them $6,000. (Tr. 89) 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. He works in an Iraqi law 
enforcement unit analogous to a SWAT team, handling hostage rescue and interdiction, 
together with other counter-terrorism activities. (Tr. 34) He was hired and trained for this 
position by the U.S. provisional government in 2007. (Tr. 33) For his first three years on 
the job, he was under U.S. government supervision. (Tr. 34) Recently, he transferred 
positions within the police force, and now provides marksmanship training to Iraqi army 
members. (Tr. 34) Applicant has not spoken to his brother since the summer of 2018. 
(Tr. 77) They had “a falling out,” over a family-related matter. (Tr. 77) Previously, they 
spoke approximately twice per week. (GE 3 at 1) 
 
 Applicant has two younger sisters. The youngest sister helps her husband, 
Applicant’s brother-in-law, operate a carpenter shop. (Tr. 36) Applicant’s next-youngest 
sister operates a business with her husband, Applicant’s other brother-in-law, involving 
online product marketing. (Tr. 80; GE 2 at 5) Before starting this business, Applicant’s 
brother-in-law was a police officer. (Tr. 80) He and Applicant’s sister started the 
business as a part-time endeavor. After it began thriving in 2017, Applicant’s brother-in-
law quit his job with the police department to focus exclusively on the online marketing 
business. (Tr. 80) 
 
 Applicant and his youngest sister communicate by text daily, and he 
communicates by text with his other sister two to three times per week. (GE 2 at 5) 
Periodically, his sisters post pictures of their children, or their favorite recipes on the 
family chat room. (Tr. 41) Applicant last traveled to Iraq to visit his family members in 
2014. (Tr. 61) He has not seen them since he has been working there. 
 
 Applicant owns no property in Iraq. (Tr. 54) He has $30,000 deposited in a U.S. 
checking account, and $15,000 invested in a 401k retirement account. (Tr. 55, 57) He 
plans to buy a home, and rent it so long as he is working overseas, then move into it 
once he returns. (Tr. 47-48)  
  
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Administrative Notice 
 
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. (HE I at 1) Although the Iraqi 
government has made impressive gains over the years towards curbing terrorism, 
significant problems remain, as the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL) continues to 
exert influence in parts of the country. (HE VII at 3) The U.S. Embassy warns that U.S. 
citizens are at high risk for kidnapping and violence and to avoid all but essential travel 
to Iraq. (Item II at 1) The U.S. government considers the potential threat to U.S. 
government personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live and work 
under strict security guidelines. (HE III at 2)  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance.” (AG ¶ 6) The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 7: 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a 
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
 Applicant has not visited his family members in Iraq in five years. Conversely, he 
communicates with them frequently through text messaging and social media, and has 
provided significant financial support to his parents over the years. Moreover, although 
Applicant is currently not talking to his brother, they have not been out of touch long 
enough to be considered estranged. I conclude AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. 
 
 Applicant has a history of supporting U.S. interests under dangerous conditions, 
beginning in 2003, when he took a job with a contractor to help provide supplies to the 
U.S. – led coalition forces in Iraq. He immigrated to the United States after his security 
was compromised, in 2010. Since living in the United States, he continued to 
demonstrate his commitment to U.S. objectives, working as a role player in military 
training exercises. Despite leaving Iraq in fear for his life in 2010, he returned in 2018 to 
help coalition forces on the ground, working as a translator, where he has performed 
excellently. Under these circumstances, I conclude AG ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of 
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign 
person, or allegiance to the group, government, or country is so nominal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest,” applies. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence 
security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 In reaching this decision, I was particularly cognizant of Applicant’s stellar 
employment and character references. 
 
Formal Finding 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:     For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Marc Curry 
Administrative Judge 
