 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10040  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
G, alcohol consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 22, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 10, 2012, scheduling the hearing for August 7, 2012. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 were 
 
2 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
The record was held open until September 17, 2012, and then extended to October 1, 
2012, for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted a two-page document 
that was marked AE E and admitted without objection. Correspondence about the 
additional exhibit is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 15, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1999. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he 
has held since about 2000. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married with two children, 
ages 16 and 3.1 
  
 Applicant started drinking when he was a teenager. He has multiple alcohol-
related arrests and convictions. He was arrested for disorderly conduct in January 1996 
and March 1997. He was drinking before each incident. He was arrested in October 
1996 and charged with driving under the influence (DUI). He pleaded guilty to the 
reduced charge of reckless driving. His driver’s license was suspended for six months, 
and he was fined $200.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in November 2002 and charged with DUI, reckless 
driving, aggressive driving, driving across the median, speeding, unsafe turn or no turn 
signal, and following too closely. He pleaded guilty to reckless driving, and the other 
charges were dismissed. He was sentenced to three days in jail and fined about 
$1,000.3 
 
 Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
April 2008. He listed his 2002 DUI arrest, but he wrote that it occurred in “03/2001 
(Estimated).” He also wrote that he did “not recall the date.”4 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a March 
2001 DUI arrest. The allegation was apparently based on the SF 86, which listed the 
wrong year for Applicant’s DUI. I find that Applicant was arrested for DUI in November 
2002, as addressed above, but he was not arrested for DUI in 2001.  
 
 Applicant was arrested in July 2005 and charged with DUI extreme with blood 
alcohol concentration (BAC) of .15% or more, first offense; DUI with BAC of .08% or 
more, first offense; DUI, first offense; and failure to stop for red light. He pleaded guilty 
to DUI extreme with BAC of .15% or more, first offense, and the other charges were 
dismissed. He was sentenced to 180 days in jail, with 170 days suspended upon 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 38-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3, 7. 
 
3 Tr. at 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
successful completion of alcohol evaluation and counseling; supervised probation for 
two years; and fines and fees of about $2,900. Conditions of his probation included 
attendance at a victim impact panel, suspended driver’s license for one year, and an 
ignition interlock was placed on his car for one year.5 
 
 The day after his last arrest, Applicant voluntarily checked himself into an 
inpatient alcohol treatment program at a hospital. He was in the hospital for about five 
days. While in the program, he was diagnosed by a doctor with alcohol dependence, 
general anxiety disorder, and depression disorder not otherwise specified.6  
 
 Applicant continued at an outpatient substance abuse treatment program from 
August 2005 through November 2005. Medical records from the program were not 
introduced. If there was a diagnosis, it is not apparent from the evidence.7  
 
 Applicant was assessed by a licensed professional counselor (LPC) in December 
2006, January 2007, and November 2011. In December 2006, he was administered the 
Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory (SASSI). The scale scores of the SASSI 
met the “criteria for classifying [Applicant] as having a high probability of being 
substance dependent.” The LPC noted that “[i]n addition to test results, supplemental 
clinical information is required to meet the accepted standards for a DSM-IV diagnosis 
of a Substance Abuse Disorder.”8   
 
 Applicant was assessed by another LPC at DOHA’s request in January 2009. 
The LPC did not specifically address alcohol dependence or alcohol abuse. She 
recommended Applicant for a security clearance, noting: 
 
It is my professional opinion that the 2005 incident was a culmination of 
stress. That it was in the past, he has learned from it and will never be 
repeated. He has a strong sense of responsibility to self, family and his 
profession. He knows the signs of stress and he now has healthy skills to 
use to relieve the stress so that the 2005 incident will never be repeated.9 
 
 The first LPC assessed Applicant again in November 2011. She reported that 
“[b]oth the standard instruments and [her] interview with [Applicant] indicated a history 
of alcohol abuse, which he reported most often took the form of intermittent binge 
drinking.” He also reported that he “has been drinking only moderately, i.e., not to the 
point of intoxication.”10 The LPC further noted: 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 23, 37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4, 7. 
 
6 Tr. at 23-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 9. 
 
7 Tr. at 24, 39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4, 7. 
 
8 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8. 
 
9 GE 6. 
 
10 Tr. at 36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8. 
 
4 
 
On all occasions that I met with him, [Applicant] showed no signs of acute 
intoxication or withdrawal and presented as a very cooperative, pleasant 
gentleman. I was struck by the high level of insight he demonstrated and 
the willingness to admit, rather than deny, the negative effect of his 
alcohol abuse. He was also able to report many positive aspects of 
sobriety or limiting his drinking, which is generally a very good prognostic 
indicator. As indicated above, however, I have a very limited history with 
him and – as with all cases of substance abuse – there is always a risk of 
relapse, and whether it will or will not occur is impossible to predict. At this 
time, however, I would say that my prognosis is fairly good and his past 
alcohol abuse and current moderate use of alcohol are not interfering with 
his employment.11 
 
 Applicant still drinks alcohol, but he stated that he only drinks responsibly. He 
believes he has learned from his past mistakes and they will not be repeated. He was 
evaluated at an outpatient substance abuse recovery center on September 19, 2012. 
The qualifications of the individual who made the evaluation are unclear, but the person 
reporting the evaluation is identified as the “Admin Director,” and the treatment plan is 
signed by a person identified as a “Clinician.” The report noted that the evaluation was 
“[b]ased on state standard SASSI and MAST (Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test)12 
testing as well as assessment interview.” A diagnosis was not provided, but it was 
determined that no substance abuse treatment was required. The short-term goal was 
to not drink and drive. The long-term goal was to develop a plan to deal with ongoing 
stress and to continue to attend “Church Group.”13 
 
Applicant submitted a number of letters and documents, and a witness attested 
to Applicant’s excellent job performance, trustworthiness, dedication, work ethic, and 
integrity.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
11 GE 8. 
 
12 See, e.g., http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1960508/. 
 
13 Tr. at 25-31, 36-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 7; AE E. 
 
14 Tr. at 15-22; AE C, D. 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
 
6 
 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence;  
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has a number of alcohol-related arrests, including three arrests for 
DUIs. He admits that he drank alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication. While 
in an inpatient alcohol treatment program at a hospital in 2005, he was diagnosed by a 
doctor with alcohol dependence. In December 2006, the scale scores of the SASSI met 
the “criteria for classifying [Applicant] as having a high probability of being substance 
dependent.” In 2011, an LPC reported that Applicant had a history of alcohol abuse. AG 
¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), 22(d), and 22(e) are applicable. There is no evidence that Applicant 
returned to uncontrolled drinking after completion of the alcohol treatment program. AG 
¶ 22(f) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant was arrested three times for DUI, but he was not arrested the fourth 
time alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. That allegation is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
 
7 
 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest was in July 2005. He completed inpatient 
and outpatient alcohol treatment. He still drinks alcohol, but he stated that he only drinks 
responsibly. There is contradictory evidence as to whether Applicant is alcohol 
dependent or an alcohol abuser. I give the recent evaluations the most weight. He 
received favorable endorsements from two LPCs and an “Admin Director” of an 
outpatient substance abuse recovery center in January 2009, November 2011, and 
September 2012. I find that Applicant has established a pattern of responsible alcohol 
use and that uncontrolled drinking is unlikely to recur. His current alcohol consumption 
does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a), 
23(b), and 23(d) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and work record. Applicant 
had a problematic history with alcohol, including three DUI arrests, but he has not had 
an alcoholic-related arrest in more than seven years. He currently drinks responsibly 
and in moderation. He received favorable endorsements from two LPCs and an “Admin 
Director” of an outpatient substance abuse recovery center. I am convinced Applicant 
 
8 
 
has control over his alcohol use and that there is little likelihood of recurrence of alcohol 
problems. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
