KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record
evidence.  Despite the presence of some mitigation, the record supports the Judge’s adverse
conclusion.  Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASE NO: 10-08192.a1
DATE: 10/04/2012
DATE: October 4, 2012
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-08192
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 18, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On July 26, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the record evidence; whether the Judge failed properly to weigh the evidence; whether the Judge’s
application of the mitigating conditions was in error; and whether the Judge’s adverse security
2
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant has worked for his
current employer, a Defense contractor, since April 2010.  He served in the U.S. military from 1998
until 2008 and held a security clearance while doing so.  He married in 2000, divorcing six years
later.  He is married a second time and has three children.  
Applicant has experienced financial problems for several years.  He and his first wife were
discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005.  Applicant has attributed the difficulties to his former
wife’s mismanagement of their finances while he was deployed.  After leaving the military he
experienced a period of unemployment and what work he did find was not remunerative.  He
became unable to pay his bills, and he had three cars repossessed.  Additionally, Applicant attempted
to maintain two households after he and his first wife separated, which exacerbated his debt
problems.
In addition to the bankruptcy, the SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts, totaling about $35,000.
Applicant has admitted these debts.  The only financial counseling Applicant has received was that
required for his bankruptcy filing.  He has made some payments toward his debts, and he has paid
off several not alleged in the SOR.  He has made no payments since February 2012.  He currently
earns enough to pay his ordinary expenses plus child support, but he cannot make any payment
toward his delinquent debts.  He is considering filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection.  
Applicant received numerous awards and accolades during his military career, and he served
at least one deployment to a war zone.  He enjoys an excellent reputation for duty performance,
responsibility, trustworthiness, and honesty.
In the Analysis, the Judge cited to evidence of the first wife’s financial mismanagement, the
cost of Applicant having to maintain two households, and Applicant’s unemployment, all of which
the Judge described as circumstances outside Applicant’s control.  However, he also noted that
Applicant’s finances continued to be a problem even after his 2005 discharge in bankruptcy.  The
Judge concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated responsible behavior regarding his debts, nor
had he made good-faith efforts to pay them.  He concluded that Applicant’s financial problems are
ongoing and that he could not determine that they are unlikely to recur.  Although citing to
Applicant’s military service in a war zone and his character evidence, the Judge ultimately
concluded that Applicant’s case in mitigation did not resolve all doubts raised by his financial
problems.    
Applicant’s brief has cited to various pieces of record evidence, such as his first wife’s
contribution to his financial problems, his military service, and his having held a clearance for 10
years while in the service, without incident or concern.  This was evidence the Judge was bound to
consider, along with the other evidence in the file.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of
the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06824 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2012).  We
find nothing in the Judge’s findings or in his analysis of the evidence that would rebut the
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(a): “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment.”  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”   
3
presumption that he had considered all of the evidence.  Moreover, Applicant has not demonstrated
that the Judge weighed the evidence in an improper manner.  
Applicant contends that the evidence supports favorable application of two mitigating
conditions, 20(a)1 and (b).2  However, the Judge addressed these provisions in the Analysis.  His
conclusion that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of persuasion as to mitigation, despite the
presence of some favorable evidence, is reasonable.  The record demonstrates that the Judge
examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a
‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of
the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington
Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a
clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
4
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
