 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03291  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate sexual behavior and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
D (sexual behavior), J (criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 13, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 19, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 24, 2012, scheduling the hearing for 
October 16, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 
 
2 
 
1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 23, 2012.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Upon motion by Department Counsel and without objection by Applicant, the 
SOR was amended by striking the allegation under Guideline J and by renumbering 
paragraph 3 as paragraph 2.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked in the defense industry since 1984, and he has held a security clearance almost 
the entire time. He has worked for his current employer since 2009. He has a master’s 
degree. He is married with three children, ages 22, 21, and 16.1 
  
 Applicant was administered a polygraph and was interviewed by an investigator 
on behalf of another government agency in October 2007. The interviewer reported that 
Applicant told him about inappropriate conduct, including the following conduct with his 
infant sons: 
 
 Subject reported when his sons were very young, from birth (1990/1991) 
to approximately two and a half years old, Subject would take baths and 
showers with his sons, and sleep naked with his sons in the bed. In his 
sleep or drowsiness (occasionally in the absence of drowsiness)[,] Subject 
would sometimes roll over and feel the children’s warm bodies next to his, 
this caused him to become aroused. 
 
o After taking a bath or shower, Subject would play naked on the bed 
with his sons before getting dressed. Subject stated, the boys 
would occasionally brush his genitals or grab his penis and Subject 
became sexually aroused, occasionally getting a partial erection. 
Subject expressed his feeling at the time by saying “it feels too 
good to be right.” Subject stated it bothers him that he let his 
children touch him, and he “could see that if this went on” it would 
be bad. 
 
o When Subject’s son was a year old, Subject would bite his son all 
over while playing. On one occasion, Subject’s son grabbed 
Subject’s penis and placed it in his mouth, pretending to bite it. 
Subject stated it was in his mouth for five seconds, but it seemed 
like forever. Subject acknowledged he waited longer than he should 
have to remove his penis and move his son away from his genitals. 
Subject stated he enjoyed the act and was aroused by it. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23, 29-30, 47-50; GE 1-3; AE A. 
 
3 
 
o Subject initially denied having masturbated after becoming aroused 
from playing with his sons, but later admitted he probably did. 
 
o Subject reported this behavior bothered him and it was not right, so 
he stopped putting himself in a position that could pose a problem 
for him. Subject started wearing shorts to bed when his youngest 
son was born in 1996.2 
 
 The interviewer also reported that Applicant discussed viewing pornography on 
the Internet:  
 
 Subject viewed underage pornography once a month while searching for 
adult pornography, for two years prior to testing, with the last instance 
occurring in July 2007. 
 
o Subject explained the underage pornography was not his primary 
focus. He would search the internet for pornographic images of 
adult women using the titles “taboo” and “incest,” just to see what 
was out there. Subject claimed he only viewed thumbnail images 
because a fee was required to view larger images. 
 
o Subject explained the images included mostly nude girls, but some 
nude boys, occasionally involved in sexual acts. Subject stated the 
individuals “looked a little young.” He described the girls as being 
underdeveloped, small breasts and little to no pubic hair. Subject 
described himself as an “equal opportunity” pornography viewer. 
Subject occasionally masturbated after viewing these images.3 
 
 The interviewer further reported several other incidents of questionable behavior 
discussed by Applicant. Some of the incidents constituted minor criminal activity.4   
 
 In April 2009, the agency revoked Applicant’s access to classified information. By 
letter dated May 7, 2009, the agency notified Applicant that the revocation was based 
upon the sexual conduct discussed above and the other incidents of questionable 
behavior, under the criminal conduct and personal conduct guidelines.5  
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 GE 3. The other incidents of questionable behavior were not alleged in the SOR, and they will not be 
used for disqualification purposes. They may be considered when assessing Applicant’s credibility. 
 
5 Tr. at 29-30, 62-63; GE 1-7. Applicant’s appeal of the revocation was denied in 2011. I have made an 
independent appraisal of the case and I have not considered the other’s agency’s revocation of 
Applicant’s clearance for any purpose other than Applicant’s knowledge of the revocation when he 
discussed it with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator.  
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied the incidents with his children happened the way it was reported 
by the interviewer in 2007. He wrote in his May 2009 letter to the other agency seeking 
a review of the revocation of his security clearance: 
 
Specific responses to self-reported adverse statements in the 07 May 
2009 letter of notification- 
 
Statement: “…you reported contact with your sons that caused you to 
become sexually aroused…” 
 
 Response: 
 
This statement was made to acknowledge a concern I had about a few 
limited incidents with my older two sons, born 1990 and 1991. Around 
1992, when my sons were 2 and 1 years old, we did on a few occasions 
take showers together as that was the quickest and easiest way to get 
them cleaned up. There were instances that one of my sons would reach 
and grab my penis and I would tell them to stop and continue on with the 
cleaning. I did not want to create an overly focused situation where they 
would continue to think it was funny or that they could do this activity to 
get my attention or get a reaction out of me. At no time did I allow my son 
to have sexual contact with me. The primary area of concern I had when I 
reported this situation was that I should have exercised better judgment 
and not even allowed a situation where my sons could place me in such a 
compromising position. The key incident occurred in 1992 when we all 
took a shower and laid on the bed nude with the television on. I was tired 
and dozed off after a few minutes. When I awoke I noticed that my 
younger son had rolled on top of me and put his mouth near or on my 
penis. This absolutely horrified me, and I was very upset by the 
circumstances. When I reported I lingered, it was because I wasn’t paying 
attention while lightly napping. I was fully honest, despite my humiliation, 
and reported it probably felt good even if I didn't enjoy it as it was 
occurring while I was sleeping. As soon as I understood what was going 
on, I immediately got up, dressed, and got the boys dressed. This 
particular incident shocked, disgusted, and disappointed me to my 
deepest core. Although it was a momentary accident and happened only 
that one time, I have always been ashamed that it happened at all. After 
that incident, I never showered or was in the nude with my boys again. 
From that point on, I washed my older boys in the bathtub and never 
allowed a repeat of that type of circumstance. My third son, born in 1996, 
has never been in the nude with me. In summary, my statement that I 
“enjoyed this incident and were aroused by it’ was made because I 
couldn't fully honestly say at the time of the actual incident, what I was 
thinking or feeling physically. As soon as I understood what was 
happening, I ended the situation and have taken firm and corrective action 
to ensure this event from 17 years ago never happened again. I achieved 
 
5 
 
no pleasure from the event and have taken serious steps to avoid any 
compromising situations even remotely similar to this.6 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant essentially denied all the misconduct that 
he discussed with the interviewer in 2007: 
 
[M]y self-reported negative statements were just completely fabricated 
only as a result of pressures of the interview and my then inability to focus 
on the “big picture.” During my interview, I experienced severe panic 
attacks that caused me to ramble and spew an incoherent mix of minor 
thoughts, concerns, guilt, fears, and totally imagined situations that most 
people without this disorder could easily ignore or suppress under such a 
stressful situation. All of these statements I made were under extreme 
duress, solely related to my panic condition, and did not reflect any reality 
or truth. To be clear – at no point did I ever commit any major or minor 
crime, show any serious lack of judgment, or engage in any irresponsible 
behavior that your organization is charging me with. 
 
 Applicant’s testimony about the incidents with his sons is mostly consistent with 
his 2009 letter.7 He stated that if there was any sexual contact, it was unintentional: 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE: So your testimony today is that your child 
never had his mouth -- your penis was never in or touched his mouth?  
 
APPLICANT: I don’t know that. If it did, it was totally accidental. It was 
unintentional. I can’t say yes or no. That’s always been a fear.8  
 
 Applicant emphasized that he was emotionally fragile at the time of the 2007 
interview. He had high blood pressure, and he was 45 pounds heavier than he is today. 
He father was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease, and his mother was undergoing 
surgery. His children were in high school, and his wife just lost her job. He stated that all 
these factors contributed to his panic attack, which caused him to admit things that were 
not true.9 
 
 Determining precisely what occurred between Applicant and his children in the 
early 1990s is difficult, but I find that it was more than he admitted to in his 2009 letter 
and at his hearing. Applicant remains deeply troubled by the event. It is unlikely that 
what he described, i.e., an inadvertent event with at most incidental contact, would 
cause such a significant enduring trauma. After considering all the evidence, I conclude 
                                                          
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 36-38, 62, 66. 
 
8 Tr. at 66. 
 
9 Tr. at 23-34, 50-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
 
6 
 
there was contact between Applicant’s penis and his son’s mouth. Only Applicant knows 
the extent of that contact.  
 
 Applicant has consistently denied intentionally seeking or receiving child 
pornography10 when he searched for adult material on the Internet. He used a common 
search engine to link him to the material, and he believes it is unlikely that any of the 
thumbnail images he viewed actually contained child pornography.11  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) for 
his Department of Defense clearance on June 8, 2009. He listed that his clearance was 
revoked by the other agency in April 2009. The SF 86 did not request him to list the 
basis of the revocation.12 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator for his Department of Defense 
clearance on August 17, 2009. He discussed the revocation of his clearance by the 
other agency. He stated that it was based on panic-driven over-reporting during his 
polygraph interview. He stated that the issues and concerns that he volunteered during 
the interview were not factual. He stated the issues leading to the revocation were the 
viewing of underage pornography and the other incidents of questionable behavior. He 
never discussed the inappropriate contact with his children, and he stated that there 
was no other reason for the revocation of his clearance.13 
 
 Applicant denied attempting to mislead the OPM investigator. He stated that he 
knew the information about the inappropriate contact with his children was available to 
the Department of Defense.14 Applicant’s reluctance to discuss the behavior involving 
his children may have been due to his discomfort and embarrassment about the 
conduct vice an attempt to keep the information from the Department of Defense. 
Nonetheless, no matter the motive, his statement that there was no other reason for the 
revocation of his clearance was false, and Applicant knew it was false when he made it. 
 
 Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in May 2010. He provided the 
documentation used by the other government agency to revoke his clearance.15 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that he does not have a criminal 
record; he has no security violations; and he has not been the subject of adverse 
                                                          
10 The SOR alleges that Applicant viewed “underage pornography.” That term is not defined. For the 
purpose of this decision, I will use the definitions of child pornography contained in 18 U.S.C. §§ 2252, 
2252A, and 2256. 
 
11 Tr. at 34-36, 63-66, 79-82; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 7. 
 
12 GE 1. 
 
13 GE 7. 
 
14 Tr. at 40-47, 66-71; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
15 GE 3. 
 
7 
 
disciplinary actions. He is highly regarded by co-workers, colleagues, and neighbors, 
who praised his excellent job performance, intelligence, professionalism, dependability, 
reliability, trustworthiness, honesty, stability, and integrity.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
                                                          
16 GE 3. 
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
There is insufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant viewed child 
pornography over the Internet. His viewing of sexually explicit material that did not 
involve minors does not establish any of the above disqualifying conditions. SOR ¶ 1.b 
is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant is obviously still haunted by what transpired between him and his sons 
in the early 1990s. When discussing what he described as at most an inadvertent 
contact, he stated: “This particular incident shocked, disgusted, and disappointed me to 
my deepest core. Although it was a momentary accident and happened only that one 
time, I have always been ashamed that it happened at all.” The events described by 
Applicant in his testimony would not constitute criminal activity. The events described to 
the interviewer in 2007 crossed the line into criminal conduct. Since I do not believe 
Applicant’s testimony about what occurred, I find that it was closer to what was 
described in 2007. AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d) are applicable.  
Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
9 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 It has been about 20 years since the events between Applicant and his sons. 
However, Applicant is still significantly affected by the acts, and he has not fully faced 
what occurred. That is evident by his failure to address it in his OPM interview. The 
behavior still serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, and duress; and it continues to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.17 There are no 
applicable mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false and misleading information to the OPM 
investigator in August 2009, when he failed to name the inappropriate contact with his 
children as one of the bases for the revocation of his clearance and he stated that there 
was no other reason for the revocation. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable. 
 
Applicant’s sexual contact with his children created a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable.  
 
                                                          
17 See ISCR Case No. 09-03233 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2010). The Appeal Board determined that an 
applicant’s child molestation offense “even though it occurred long ago, impugn[ed] his trustworthiness 
and good judgment.” 
 
10 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
Applicant provided false information to the OPM investigator in 2009, and he has 
not been completely forthcoming about what occurred between him and his sons when 
they were infants. There are no mitigating conditions applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his long work record in 
the defense industry. Applicant has not faced what transpired between him and his 
children about 20 years. It still troubles him to the point that he lied rather than discuss it 
honestly and completely. I have significant unresolved doubts about his judgment, 
honesty, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
