 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10349 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had three unresolved debts, which totaled in excess of $23,000. She is 
making monthly payments on each of the debts. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 8, 2012, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
  
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 On May 31, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
July 30, 2012, I was assigned the case. On September 4, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on September 19, 2012.  
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 9, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, as did 
one additional witness. Applicant submitted Ex. A through H, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional information. On September 25, 2012, additional material was submitted. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted into the 
record as Ex.I-1 through I-6. On September 25, 2012, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted all of the factual allegations in 
the SOR, and her admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old senior industrial security representative (Ex. I-6) who 
has worked for a defense contractor since January 1980, and seeks to maintain a top 
secret security clearance. (Tr. 54) Her current annual salary is $75,042. (Ex. 3) She 
wants to address all of her unpaid obligations. She believes in paying her bills. (Tr. 68) 
She has paid off four additional credit card accounts not reflected on the SOR. (Ex. 7) 
Applicant attended a company sponsored financial seminar. (Tr. 33) 
 
 Applicant’s co-workers, supervisors, and friends state: Applicant is kind, 
dedicated, hardworking, loyal, trustworthy, and dedicated to completing all tasks and 
assignments. (Ex. F) A friend and co-worker stated Applicant had great moral character. 
(Tr. 65)  
 
 In 1995, Applicant and her husband filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection 
when her then husband lost his job. He was unemployed for 11 months. (Ex. 8, Tr. 29) 
They had five children living with them at the time. (Tr. 28) When he obtained a job, it 
was at half of his previous salary. In September 1995, their debts were discharged. The 
bankruptcy had listed $143,000 in assets and $180,000 in liabilities. (Ex. 9) The secured 
debt representing two vehicles, an equity loan, and the mortgage totaled more than 
$163,000. There was $16,000 in unsecured debt consisting mostly of credit card 
accounts and two lines of credit. (Ex. 9) At the time of the bankruptcy, Applicant’s two 
vehicles were both at least seven years old. (Tr. 33) In March 1998, they filed for 
divorce. 
 
 In March 2008, Applicant moved from the coast to the mid-west with her 
boyfriend of ten years. He had moved in 2007. (Tr. 56) In July 2008, shortly after her 
arrival, the relationship ended. Prior to the breakup, she had a credit score of 800. As of 
May 2012, her credit score had declined to 590. (Ex. G)  
 
3 
 
 In April 2010, Applicant contacted a debt management counseling service to help 
her settle her debts. The service told her to stop paying her creditors and make 
payment to them. (Tr. 38) In June 2010, the service told her it would take a year to 
settle her accounts. Applicant indicated that was too long and the company refunded 
her $600, which was a portion of what she had paid. (Ex. 4, Tr. 60) The debt 
management service was then terminated. 
 
 In July 2010, Applicant self-reported being more than 180 days delinquent on 
four credit cards. (Ex. 7) Applicant receives $1,170 in rent for her condo located at her 
prior location on which there is a monthly mortgage of $1,134. (Ex. 4) She had 
purchased the condo for $149,000, but its fair market value had fallen to $84,000. (Ex. 
4)  
 
 In May 2012, Applicant had applied for a personal loan, but that consolidation 
loan was turned down. (Ex. G) Also in May 2012, her request for a hardship loan from 
her 401(k) retirement plan was also turned down. (Ex. H) She is ineligible for a loan 
from her 401(k) plan until April 2013. (Tr. 30, 32) As of July 2010, the value of her 
401(k) plan was $67,000. (Ex. 4) 
 
 Applicant is currently making $50 payments on a department store account (SOR 
1.b, $15,085) for the purchase of appliances. The account has been charged off. In 
March 2011, she started making payments on this debt and has continued with monthly 
payments. (Tr. 29) In August 2012, she made a $50 payment (Ex. I-5) which reduced 
the balance to $14,985.2 (Ex. I-5)  
 
 Applicant pays the debt listed in SOR 1.c ($3,418) by a $150 monthly, 
automatically debit from her checking account. (Ex. D) Between October 2011 and 
August 2012, she made 12 payments. (Ex. C-1, Ex. I-3, Tr. 31) Her current balance is 
$2,968. (Ex. I.1) 
 
 Applicant currently makes $50 monthly payments to the debt listed in SOR 1.d 
($4,457). The debt resulted from the purchase of a computer. She has made seven 
payments starting in February, 2011. (Ex. C-2) With her August 2012 payment, the 
balance has been reduced to $4,131. (Ex. I-1, I-2) She was involved in a vehicle 
accident, which damaged her 15-year-old vehicle so that she required a different 
vehicle. (Tr. 61) She is current on her $428 monthly car payments. (Tr. 62) Her 
payments on this account were interrupted following her auto accident when she started 
making car payments. 
 
  Applicant puts $267 weekly into her savings account. (Tr. 43) She is not getting 
any calls or letters from creditors demanding payment. (Tr. 63)  
 
                                                          
2
 The balances on Applicant’s accounts have declined as much as the payments she had made partly 
because of the interest accumulating on the accounts and partly because the SOR balances reflect a 
credit bureau report (Ex. 5) dated after she was already making payments.  
 
4 
 A summary of Applicant’s bankruptcy and three accounts and the current status 
of each follow: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
A 1995 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy filed . 
Assets 
$143,000 
liabilities 
$180,000  
She filed for bankruptcy protection 
because her then husband lost his job. 
B Charged-off department 
store account. 
$15,135 
 
Paying. Applicant pays $50 monthly on 
this debt. Current balance is $14,985. 
(Ex. 2, 3, E, I-1, I-4, I-5)  
C Charged-off department 
store account. 
$3,993 
 
Paying. Applicant pays $150 monthly on 
this debt. Current balance is $2,968. 
(Ex. 2, 3, C-1, D, I-1, I-3) 
D Charged-off department 
store account. 
$4,482 Paying. Applicant pays $50 monthly on 
this debt. Current balance is $4,131. 
(Ex. 2, 3, C-2, E, I-1, I-2) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $23,610  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
5 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
 
6 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. In 1995, Applicant had to resort to 
bankruptcy protection. She had three unresolved debts totaling more than $23,000, 
which she is now resolving. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 
AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
  
 The following six Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 In 1995, 17 years ago, Applicant sought bankruptcy protection (SOR 1.a) when 
her husband lost his job. The majority of their liability was the home. Their two vehicles 
were both at least seven years old at the time of the bankruptcy. It does not appear they 
were living beyond their means. There is nothing about that bankruptcy that raises 
current security concerns. 
 
 Applicant has three debts on which she is making payments. In March 2011, she 
started repaying the department store debt (SOR 1.b) and currently makes $50 monthly 
payments. In October 2011, she started addressing another department store debt 
(SOR 1. c). She currently has $150 automatically debited from her checking account 
each month to pay this debt. Starting in February 2011, she began addressing the 
 
7 
remaining debt (SOR 1.d) resulting from a computer purchase. She currently makes 
$50 monthly payments on the debt. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant had only three unresolved debts, which is a small 
number of debts. She is now addressing that debt and the circumstances that led to her 
debt are unlikely to recur. These three debts do not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were affected when she left her home and moved to a new 
state to be with her boyfriend of ten years. She anticipated marriage, but the 
relationship ended shortly after her move. She had anticipated sharing household and 
monthly obligations, but, instead, had to pay all of her living expenses without support of 
her boyfriend. This was an unexpected event, largely beyond her control. She is paying 
the debts indicating she is acting responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. 
 
Applicant attended a company sponsored financial seminar and there are clear 
indications her financial problems are being resolved. AG & 20(c) applies. She has been 
making payment on the three debts for more than a year and will continue to make her 
monthly payments. AG & 20(d) applies. AG & 20(e) and AG & 20(f) do not apply 
because Applicant is not contesting any of the three debts and affluence was not 
alleged or raised by the evidence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
 
8 
and regulations. Applicant is not living beyond her means. She has stated a desire to 
repay her debts coupled with more than a year’s history of repayment. She has 
demonstrated that she has established a plan to resolve her delinquent debt and has 
taken significant action to implement that plan. Having made monthly payments over 
such an extended period of time I am confident she will continue doing so until the 
accounts have been resolved. She has established a “meaningful track record,” which 
includes evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of her debts.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are being paid—it is whether her 
financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. 
(See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
