 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 11-08097 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 10, 2010. On 
June 12, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline B and Guideline C. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
 
hearing on August 8, 2012, scheduling the hearing for September 4, 2012.  Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
and presented Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A. I kept the record open until September 18, 
2012, for Applicant to submit documentation concerning his bank account. He timely 
forwarded a document, which is marked as AX B, and was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 11, 2012. 
 
     Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government, through Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts with respect to Turkey. Applicant did not object to 
the documents. A packet was labeled Hearing Exhibit I and entered into the record.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference) with 
explanations. He provided additional information to support his case. His admissions in 
his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant was born in Afghanistan to Turkish parents. His father traveled for work 
and Applicant spent part of his childhood in Afghanistan, England, Syria and the United 
States. Applicant and his family resided in the United States from 1979 until 1983. He 
attended high school in the United States and began his undergraduate studies in an 
American university, but had to return to Turkey with his family. When his family 
returned to Turkey for his father’s work, he completed his undergraduate degree in 
Turkey (1987). In 1989, Applicant returned to the United States to obtain a professional 
position in the field of engineering. He has been with his current employer since 2008. 
His professional life in the United States has been in the engineering field. He is a 
senior chief electrical engineer. Applicant has not held a security clearance. He became 
a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1999. (GX 1)  Applicant is married to a naturalized U.S. 
citizen and has one daughter who is a U.S. citizen.   
 
 Applicant and his wife own a home in the United States. He also owns a rental 
property. He estimates his net worth is approximately $800,000.  
 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen of Turkey and currently resides in Ecuador. His 
brother owned a restaurant. The business closed and he is not employed. Applicant 
speaks to his brother on major holidays and birthdays. (Tr. 43; GX 2) 
 
Applicant has another brother who is a citizen of Turkey and resides in the United 
States. He is in the process of becoming a permanent resident. (AX) He is divorced. 
Applicant’s brother sells cars. Applicant speaks to him on a regular basis. (Tr. 45) 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens of Turkey. His father-in-
law is retired and living in Turkey. He had worked for an import business. (Tr. 46) 
Applicant occasionally speaks to him via Skype. He sees his father-in-law each year 
when he visits Turkey for vacation. (Tr. 46) Applicant’s mother-in-law is a permanent 
resident of the United States. She spends part of the year in the United States and part 
of the year in Turkey. She is in the process of becoming a U.S. citizen. When she is not 
in the United States, Applicant has contact with her three or four times. (Tr. 47) 
  
Applicant’s two cousins are citizens and residents of Turkey. He speaks to them 
two to three times a year on birthdays or holidays. (Tr.48) Before his mother’s death, he 
had more frequent contact with them. One cousin is retired and the other works for a 
company. (Tr.50) 
 
Applicant maintains infrequent contact with two childhood friends via Facebook 
and email. He believes he contacts them three or four times a year. (Tr. 51) 
 
In 2005, Applicant and his wife purchased a vacation home in Turkey. His 
vacation home is worth approximately $150,000. The home is located in the southwest 
coast along the Aegean Sea, which is predominantly a vacation resort. (Tr. 57) He and 
his family vacation there every year for about three or four weeks. (Tr. 57)  At that time, 
he opened two bank accounts in Turkey. They are now both closed accounts. (Tr. 51; 
AX B) 
 
When Applicant’s mother died in 2010, he inherited four properties. He shares 
this inheritance with his two brothers. Thus, his share is one-third, which is about 
$100,000. (Tr.55) He collects rent on two properties and keeps one bank account in 
Turkey for deposits which amount to about $10,000.  (AX B) 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant came to the United States and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
June 1999. He possessed a Turkish passport (issued in 1986) which was to expire in 
1999. Applicant obtained an extension until 2004 and another until 2005. He used his 
Turkish passport when he traveled to Turkey in 2002 and in September 2004, after 
becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen.  His passport expired in 2005. Applicant explained 
that he travelled to Turkey in 2002 and 2004 and used his Turkish passport. (Tr. 61) He 
further noted that he carried his U.S. passport. 
 
As for the issue of mandatory military service, Applicant credibly explained that 
he has been in the United States since 1989. He received waivers for the military 
service since he was not living in Turkey. Applicant explained after the earthquake in 
Turkey, the government offered a one-month paid option to fulfill the requirement. The 
money was donated to a relief fund. He paid a $5,000 fee and went to Turkey for one 
month. (Tr. 64) Applicant explained that he stayed on a military installation for about 
four weeks in 2000. He was taught how to salute, march and shoot a gun. (Tr. 65) He 
 
4 
 
 
was adamant that he was not trained for “military service.” He told his U.S. employer 
that he was going to Turkey but he did not disclose anything about his U.S. citizenship 
in Turkey. Applicant’s motivation at the time was also due to his mother who suggested 
he do the mandatory service. (Tr. 70) 
  
  Applicant sincerely and credibly states that as far as his allegiance, he can only 
reaffirm that his wife and daughter intend to live in the United States. He spent his high 
school years and part of college in the United States. He had to return to Turkey with his 
family when his father’s work required it. His entire professional career has been in the 
United States. He intends to stay in the United States. He and his wife purchased a 
vacation home in an area of Turkey that is international. He feels like a tourist when he 
is in the country. His father was Turkish and therefore Applicant automatically became a 
dual citizen. His parents are deceased. He views his relationships as casual and minor 
with the relatives who remain in Turkey. He emphasizes that he has no strong feelings 
about Turkey. Applicant states that he does not disclose the nature of his work to 
people in Turkey. Applicant was candid and sincere when he stated that acting against 
the interests of the United States would be acting against his family and the future of his 
daughter. He has no desire to compromise the security of the United States. For that 
reason, his allegiance to the United States is clear and unequivocal.  
 
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary system and a 
president with limited powers. Turkey entered World War II on the Allied side shortly 
before the war ended, becoming a charter member of the United Nations. Turkey is a 
member of NATO and candidate for the EU, and its primary political, economic, and 
security ties are with the West.  Modern Turkey encompasses bustling cosmopolitan 
centers, pastoral farming villages, barren wastelands, peaceful Aegean coastlines, and 
steep mountain regions. More than 70% of Turkey’s population lives in urban areas that 
juxtapose Western lifestyle with more traditional ways of life.  
 
 Turkey is a strategically significant country because of its location straddling 
Europe and Asia with borders to the Middle East. Turkey controls the straits leading 
from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea and shares borders with Syria, Iraq, and 
Iran. There have been violent attacks throughout Turkey and there is a continuing threat 
of terrorist actions and violence against U.S. citizens and interests throughout the 
country. Terrorist bombings over the past eight years – some causing significant 
numbers of casualties – have struck religious, government, government-owned, 
political, tourist and business targets in a number of locations in Turkey. Terrorists do 
not distinguish between official and civilian targets. In July 2011, 15 terrorists claiming 
association with al-Qaida were arrested for gathering explosive materials in preparation 
for a planned attack on the U.S. Embassy in Ankara. 
 
 Turkey has played a critical role as a friendly, neutral arbiter in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan, as a regional facilitator, International Security Assistance Force contributor, 
and bilateral donor. On the development front, Turkey has provided assistance on 
health, education, and agricultural projects in Afghanistan. Turkey also conceived and 
continued to support an annual meeting of the Ministers of Interior of the Neighbors of 
 
5 
 
 
Iraq, which focused on supporting regional security, including counterterrorism and 
border security issues. 
 
     Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 
6 
 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 One disqualifying condition under this guideline is relevant. A disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a).  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
 
7 
 
 
nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to 
grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area 
where family members resided).   
 
 Applicant has lived and worked in the United States since 1989. He is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s wife and daughter are U.S. citizens.  His older 
brother lives in the United States and is in the process of becoming a permanent 
resident.  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-law, cousins, and his childhood friend live in 
Turkey.  A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has no 
close relationship with his cousins.  
 
After considering the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Turkey as well as each 
individual tie, I conclude that Applicant’s family ties are sufficient to raise an issue of a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.   
Based on all these circumstances, I conclude that AG ¶ 7(a) is raised.  
 
AG ¶ 7(e) “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation” is also raised. 
Applicant has acquired a one-third right of inheritance based on his mother’s death. The 
amount is approximately $100,000. He receives a rental income from two of those 
properties and has one bank account in Turkey with approximately $10,000. Applicant 
and his wife purchased a vacation home in Turkey that is valued at $150,000. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can also be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
 
8 
 
 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can further be mitigated by showing “the 
value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such 
that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure the individual.” AG ¶ 8(f) is raised in mitigation.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1989. He had previously lived in the 
United States with his family and attended high school and some college. His parents 
are deceased. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen. His wife is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. He has a daughter who is a U.S. citizen. His brothers do not live in Turkey. One 
brother lives in the Unites States. His mother-in-law shares her time between the United 
States and Turkey, and she has permanent resident status in the United States. 
Applicant has significant professional and personal ties to the United States. There is no 
indication that Applicant’s relatives are in positions or are involved in activities that 
would place Applicant in a position of having to choose between his family living in 
Turkey and those of the United States. In light of Applicant’s close ties to the United 
States, it is unlikely that he would choose his relatives in Turkey over his life in the 
United States.  His wealth and assets in the United States outweigh his inheritance 
assets in Turkey. His vacation home is in an international resort. I find mitigating 
conditions AG ¶ 8(a) (b) and (f) apply. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or 
make decision that are harmful to the interests of the United States. 
 
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse security 
clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 
2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual national, but 
rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country through actions.” 
ISCR Case NO. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1999). 
 
 A disqualifying condition may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to (1) possession of a 
current foreign passport.” AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Applicant admitted that he renewed his Turkish 
passport after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen because he did not have to get a visa 
to enter the country. He had no thought of  the consequences for a future security 
clearance. Applicant’s Turkish passport expired in 2005.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.”  AG ¶ 
11(e) Applicant was born to Turkish parents. He receives mitigation under AG 11(e) “the 
 
9 
 
 
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated.”   
 
 Under ¶ 10(a)(2) “military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country” raises another security concern. Applicant was candid that in 2000, he opted to 
serve the mandatory service in Turkey by spending one month. He was credible in that 
this was a formality. His mother was alive at the time and encouraged him to compete 
this so that there would be no problems with visiting her. The military service occurred 
more than 12 years ago. He did not foresee that in the future there would be a problem 
for him. He told his then employer that he was going to Turkey to complete the 
mandatory requirement. He donated the money to an earthquake relief service. He has 
mitigated the foreign preference security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant spent a considerable amount of time in the United States both as a 
child, receiving his high school education, and part of his college education. He is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 1989. He and his wife 
and daughter reside in the United States, and are U.S. citizens. He was articulate, 
candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. Applicant’s home is in the United States. 
Applicant has been successful in his work. His current employer recommends him for 
his security clearance.  
 
 Applicant chose to leave his home and pursue his career in the United States. He 
is firmly established in the United States. The overwhelming majority of his assets are 
 
10 
 
 
located in the United States. His inheritance from his mother’s estate does not outweigh 
his substantial financial ties to the United States. Although Applicant has some familial 
ties to Turkey, I am convinced that he will resolve any issues in favor of the United 
States.   
 
 There is no evidence any of the individuals at issue are involved with, or under 
scrutiny, by interests antithetical to the United States. His distant family members in 
Turkey do not know the specifics of his work.  
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a vacation home in 2005. He visits as a tourist 
once a year for summer vacation. He no longer has the two bank accounts that he 
opened in 2005. He does have one account in Turkey for the proceeds of the rental 
income from his deceased mother’s properties.   
 
 Regarding Applicant’s life in the United States, he is an American citizen, with a 
stable family, social, and professional life. His life is focused here.  He has now only a 
U.S. passport. His Turkish passport expired in 2005. He has loyalty to the United 
States. His professional career has blossomed in the United States.  There is no 
evidence indicating that he may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign power or 
interest. His explanation about his mandatory military service in 2000 was credible. He 
credibly stated he would report any attempts to influence him to security. In light of 
these facts and the country at issue, I find that Applicant successfully mitigated foreign 
influence concerns, as well as foreign preference concerns.   
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
Guideline C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence and 
foreign preference. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegation in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In view of all the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
