1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
     ) ISCR Case No. 11-01583 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 28, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an 
interrogatory to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in his 
background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant's 
response to the interrogatory, DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance. DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
dated May 25, 2012, detailing security concerns for handling protected information and 
personal conduct. These actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
2 
 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 8, 2012. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 27, 2012. He admitted all allegations under 
both guidelines K and E. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 17, 2012. 
Applicant discussed the hearing date with Department Counsel on July 18, 2012, and 
the case was assigned to me on July 31, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
August 1, 2012, scheduling a hearing for August 16, 2012. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government offered three exhibits that I marked and admitted into the 
record without objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 3. Applicant 
testified. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 29, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He was born in Vietnam, and became a naturalized 
United States citizen in 1989. He received his bachelor’s degree from a university in the 
United States in 1988. He has taken some postgraduate courses. He married his wife in 
1988 but they divorced in 2006. He and his wife remarried in 2007. They have two 
children living at home. He was employed as an information systems administrator for a 
defense contractor from March 2009 until September 2010. (Tr. 14-15; Gov. Ex. 1, e-
QIP, dated December 28, 2009)   
 
Applicant commenced employment with a defense contractor as an information 
systems administrator in 2009. Starting in February 2010, he was receiving 
indoctrination and other training on the contractor’s classified and unclassified systems. 
In March 2010, he was provided a classified user name and password for the classified 
system. Instead of memorizing this information, he wrote them in a word document and 
saved them in an unclassified system. He forgot about the document until he discovered 
it in July 2010. (SOR 1.b) He did not delete the document from his unclassified system. 
His company discovered the classified information on the unclassified system in August 
2010 during a routine inventory of the unclassified system. (Tr. 20-21, 29-33; Gov. Ex. 
2, OPM Investigation, dated November 12, 2010: Gov. Ex. 3, e-mails, dated August 30, 
2010) 
 
In March 2010, Applicant was working on the overnight third shift as an 
information systems administrator for the defense contractor. An employee put a 
classified hard drive on his desk for him to scan for viruses. The label identifying the 
hard drive as classified was on the bottom of the drive and not on the top. Applicant did 
not examine the drive to determine the classification of the drive. Applicant plugged the 
hard drive into an unclassified computer to scan for viruses. His supervisor saw the 
classified drive connected to the unclassified computer and directed Applicant to 
disconnect the drive (SOR 1.a). (Tr. 21, 27-29)  
 
Applicant started work at the defense contractor’s local office, but soon took a 
position at a different location. Applicant’s family did not move to the new location so 
3 
 
Applicant had to drive nine hours one way a few times a month to visit them. When 
Applicant took this new position, he received a corporate credit card to use for his 
business expenses. He received written instruction that the card was to be used for 
business and not personal expenses, but he did not read the instructions. He used the 
card to purchase gas for his trips home as well as other personal items. He even used it 
to pay for some household items for his family. (SOR 2.a) The use of the credit card for 
personal items was a violation of company policy. After his company discovered that he 
was using the credit card for personal expenses, he was advised of the proper use of 
the company credit card. Applicant continued to use the company credit card for 
personal expenses. Applicant was not always home to get his mail and pay his bills, so 
he became delinquent in paying this credit card bill. The company learned of Applicant’s 
continued unauthorized use of the credit card. He was involuntarily terminated from his 
employment for the unauthorized use of the credit card on September 28, 2010. (Tr. 21-
22, 24-27; Gov. Ex. 3, e-Mails, dated August 30, 2012) 
 
In November 2010, Applicant commenced employment as an information 
technology systems administrator with his present defense contractor employer. 
Applicant was interviewed on November 12, 2010, by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator concerning the application he submitted for a security 
clearance on December 28, 2009. By this time, Applicant had been terminated by the 
original defense contractor for cause, and was now working for another defense 
contractor. He told the investigator that he left employment with the original defense 
contractor for a better job. He had no issues or problems and left on good terms. In fact 
he had been terminated for cause. Applicant admitted lying to the investigator. (SOR 
2.b; Tr. 22-24, 33-34; Gov. Ex. 2, Testimony, dated November 12, 2010) He stated: 
 
“So that was my mistake to tell the investigator that there was no 
problem at [defense contractor], that I actually had a letter of reprimand. I 
should have been honest and not tell her that. Because not to make an 
excuse about what I did, but I didn’t want to lose my job, and nothing, no 
income to support—my wife was not working. And that was the only job I 
had in 2010. So I should have been honest and told her, yes, I was given 
a letter of reprimand because of the SIPERNET issue and the password, 
and got an involuntary termination. I should have told her that. Probably 
because I mentioned that I did not want to lose my job. I had to support 
my family, my wife and two small children.” (Tr. 22-23)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
4 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Handling Protected Information (Guideline K) 
 
 The deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information is a serious security concern. It raises 
doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, as well as a willingness 
and ability to safeguard such information. (AG 33) 
 
 Applicant made a copy of a classified user name and password and placed it into 
an unclassified system. He connected a classified hard drive to an unclassified 
computer. This information is sufficient to establish Handling of Protected Information 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 34(b) (collecting or storing classified or other protected 
information at home or in any unauthorized location; AG ¶ 34(c) (loading, drafting, 
editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise handling classified reports, data, or 
other information on any unapproved equipment including but not limited to any 
typewriter, word processor, or computer hardware, software, drive, system, game 
board, handheld “palm” or pocket device or other adjunct equipment); and AG 34(g) 
(any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive 
information). 
5 
 
 I considered Handling of Protected Information Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 35(a) 
(so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG 35(b) (the 
individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now 
demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities; and 
AG 35(c) (the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training). 
 
 Applicant had two security violations in a short time, one in February 2010, and 
the other in March 2010. They occurred while he was in training to be a systems 
administrator for the classified system. There have been no other reported security 
violations. The security violations happened over two years ago in close proximity to 
each other. He was being trained at the time. Since the security violations happened 
while he was being trained, they are unlikely to recur. Since there have been no other 
violations, it appears he responded positively to his security training. Even though he 
discovered the user name and password in an unsecured word file in July 2010, it does 
not affect the mitigation of the security violation. Applicant mitigated the security 
violations for handling protected information.  
 
Personal Conduct (Guideline E) 
 
There is a security concern for conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. A refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official representative in connection 
with personnel security or trustworthiness determinations will normally result in an 
unfavorable clearance action. (AG ¶ 15) 
 
Applicant used his company-issued credit card for personal expenses in violation 
of company policy. It was the first time Applicant had been issued a company credit 
card. The e-mails between Applicant’s supervisor and the human resource office (Gov. 
Ex. 3) show that after being advised of the rules for use of the credit card, Applicant 
continued to use it for personal expenses. Applicant was terminated by his employer for 
violation of the company credit card policy. When questioned about the reason for 
leaving this company, Applicant told the security investigator that he had no problems or 
issues with the employer and left on good terms for a better job opportunity. In response 
to the allegation in the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant admitted lying to the 
investigator about leaving the job on good terms. He stated he lied because he was 
concerned about losing his job since he was the only source of income for his wife and 
children. These facts raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 16(b) 
(deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
government representative); and AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not 
explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
6 
 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulation, or other 
characteristic indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of; (3)  a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
I considered all of the Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions but particularly AG 
¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; AG 17(c) (the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 
17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change 
the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstance, or 
factors that caused the untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and 
such behavior is unlikely to recur. I find that these mitigating conditions do not apply. 
Applicant used his company-issued credit card for personal purchases in violation of 
company policy. Even after being advised of the violation, he continued to use the card 
for incorrect purchases. He deliberately lied to a security investigator about the 
termination from his former employer. He admitted the true facts only when confronted 
with the allegation in the SOR and at the hearing. The offense is not minor since it is a 
deliberate and direct false statement to a investigator in the process of a security 
investigation. It is recent in that it happened less than two years ago. Applicant admitted 
his gave a false statement for fear of losing his job and his income to support his family. 
He presented no information to indicate that he would not lie again in response to the 
same fears. While he has acknowledged his behavior, he presented no information to 
show he would not exhibit untrustworthy, unreliable, and inappropriate behavior again 
under the same circumstance. Applicant has not mitigated security concerns for 
personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns for the two security violations when he was in training over two years ago. 
However, he did not mitigate the security concern for personal conduct. He continued to 
violate the company credit card policy after being advised of the violation. He 
deliberately lied to a security investigator concerning the reasons for his termination 
from a prior job. Applicant’s personal conduct indicates that he may not be trustworthy, 
concerned, responsible, and careful regarding the safeguarding of classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns for personal conduct. Access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
