 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04558 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 26, 2008. He was granted access to classified information. On 
September 13, 2010, Applicant submitted another e-QIP to retain access to classified 
information required for his position with a defense contractor. After reviewing the 
results of an ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant an interrogatory to clarify or augment 
potentially disqualifying information. After reviewing the results of the background 
investigation and Applicant's responses to the Interrogatory, DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On February 23, 
2012, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns for personal conduct under Guideline E, criminal conduct under Guideline J, 
 
2 
 
 
and alcohol consumption under Guideline G. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on March 19, 2012.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response. He denied all allegations 
under Guideline J. At the hearing, he admitted the conduct took place, but he had an 
explanation for each allegation of criminal conduct. He denied the allegation under 
Guideline E. He admitted two allegations (SOR 3.a, and 3.e) and denied three (SOR 
3.b, 3.c, and 3.d) under Guideline G. He requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 23, 2012. The case was 
delayed for a few months because Applicant was deployed overseas. The case was 
assigned to me on June 27, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 28, 2012, 
for a hearing on July 25, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government 
offered four exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the record without objections as 
Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 4. Applicant testified. I left the record open for 
Applicant to submit documents. Applicant timely submitted medical documents that I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibit (App. Ex.) A. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 10, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant denied the allegations under criminal 
conduct with explanation, denied three and admitted two allegations under alcohol 
consumption, and denied the allegation under Guideline E. His admissions are included 
in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old aviation technician for a defense contractor. He served 
in the Army National Guard from July 1987 until 1995. He served on active duty in the 
Navy as an aviation technician from December 1999 until May 2006. He was 
discharged as a petty officer first class (E-6) with a general discharge under honorable 
conditions for alcohol rehabilitation failure in May 2006. He was married from 1998 until 
2004, and from 2006 until 2010. At present, he is single. While working for a defense 
contractor, he was deployed to Iraq from August 2007 until September 2009. (Tr. 9-14; 
Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated September 13, 2010; Gov. Ex. 2, Security Investigator’s 
Transcript of October 14, 2010, dated January 23, 2012) 
 
The SOR alleges criminal conduct for driving on a suspended operator’s license 
and resisting arrest in January 1991 (SOR 1.a); trespassing in August 1995 (SOR 1.b); 
misdemeanor reckless handling of a firearm within an occupied dwelling in December 
1996 (SOR 1.c); domestic assault on March 4, 2003 (SOR 1.d); violating conditions of 
bail on March 21, 2003 (SOR 1.e); domestic assault in February 2006 (SOR 1.f); and 
showing obscene material to a minor in May 2010 (SOR 1.g). 
 
3 
 
 
In January 1991, Applicant was asked to drive one of his friends to a girl’s house. 
He had completed high school and was 19 years old. He was stopped by police but he 
had left his driver’s license at home. He had been drinking alcohol earlier in the evening. 
He was placed in a police car and taken to the police station. Outside of the station, he 
went to scratch his leg and the police officers grabbed him thinking he was reaching for 
a weapon. He pushed back at the officers. He remembers going to court but the 
charges were dismissed because he had a driver’s license and the potential resisting 
arrest was a misunderstanding. (Tr. 33-38) 
 
Applicant’s mother passed away in early 1995. In August 1995, he went to the 
house he shared with her when he lived at home to retrieve some items he believed 
belonged to him. He was the trustee for his mother’s estate, but his stepfather of 16 
years occupied the house. They had a dispute as to the ownership of the property in the 
house, and the stepfather called police and accused him of trespassing. He told the 
judge the circumstances and received a small fine. (Tr. 38-41) 
 
In December 1996, Applicant had been hunting and was sitting in a chair at his 
sister’s house with his shotgun in his lap. He did not know the gun was loaded. The gun 
slipped from his grip and discharged. He was charged with reckless handling of a 
firearm in a dwelling. He admitted his handling of the weapon was reckless. (Tr. 41-43; 
Gov. Ex. 4, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Criminal Records) 
 
By 2003, Applicant had joined the Navy. His wife accompanied him to his duty 
station. He returned from a six-month deployment in March 2003 and suspected she 
had been unfaithful. They argued, she assaulted him, and he assaulted her. He had 
been drinking alcohol before the incident. She called the police, and he was charged 
with domestic assault and released pending trial. A condition of his release was not 
drinking alcohol. The charge was later dismissed. (Tr. 43-46; Gov. Ex. 4, FBI Criminal 
Records) 
 
Later in March 2003, after Applicant had moved from his house and while still 
under the orders pending trial, he went to a pub with a friend. He saw the police officer 
who had arrested him earlier in the month for domestic assault. He was drinking a beer 
and went to talk to the police officer. The police officer knew he was pending trial and 
could not drink or possess alcohol. He was arrested for violating the conditions of his 
release, and sentenced to four days in jail and probation for one year. (Tr. 46-47) 
 
In February 2006, Applicant had a dispute with his live-in girlfriend. He had a 
medical procedure on his eye and was resting at home and drinking alcohol. She 
returned from work complaining about receiving a speeding ticket. They argued and he 
held her down on the floor. She went to the police who charged him with assault. Since 
he had been drinking beer that afternoon, it was considered by police and his command 
as an alcohol-related incident. He was sentenced to a fine and court cost. This action 
precipitated his discharge from the Navy in May 2006 for alcohol rehabilitation failure. 
(Tr. 51-53; Gov. Ex. 4, FBI Criminal Records) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant started communicating with a female over Facebook in the spring of 
2010. After a few months, they started texting and talking. Applicant initially believed the 
person he was communicating with was at least 18 years old since she discussed going 
out at night and partying. There were no discussions of age, but he did believe she may 
be a young girl. In fact, the person was a 16-year-old high school student. She knew he 
was 38 years old. After a few months, they exchanged pornographic pictures of each 
other. The girl’s mother discovered the pictures on her daughter’s computer, and alerted 
the local police. Applicant was contacted by the local police. He agreed to go to the 
state where the girl was located to be arrested. He appeared at the police station 
accompanied by his lawyer and a bail bonds man. He was fingerprinted and formally 
charged but released. In May 2010, there was a felony charge of transmitting obscene 
material to a minor against him. Applicant initially pled not guilty with both he and his 
attorney in court in July 2010. His next court date was set as September 12, 2011. He 
pled guilty at the September 2011 hearing with his attorney present. He was sentenced 
on November 4, 2011, to pay a fine and was placed on supervised probation for a year. 
His probation was transferred to his home state and will run until November 3, 2012. 
The conditions of his probation are no alcohol or drug use, and good behavior. He is 
required to keep his address and job current and to report any incidents with police. He 
has met his probation officer, but his contact with him is mainly by phone. (Tr. 53-64, 
73-74) 
 
At the time he completed his e-QIP in September 2010; Applicant had been 
arrested, appeared at the police station and in court with his attorney, pled not guilty in 
July 2010, and received a court date of September 2011. He responded no to the 
question on his September 3, 2010 e-QIP asking if he had been issued a summons, 
citation, or ticket to appear in court on a criminal proceeding and if he was on trial or 
awaiting trial on criminal charges, or currently awaiting sentencing for a criminal offense. 
At the time, Applicant had been arrested, notified of the offense against him, appeared 
in the police station with his lawyer and bails bondman, pled not guilty, and advised of 
his trial date in September 2011. He had been to court and knew there were charges 
pending against him. When asked at the hearing why he did not list the arrest on his e-
QIP, Applicant replied he did not know what he was thinking. He completed the 
application both at work and at home and had time to consider his responses. He did 
not consult anyone at work and completed the application on his own. He understood 
that the criminal offense was serious and that he could be incarcerated. He was both 
embarrassed and nervous about the offense. He did not provide any information on this 
arrest or pending trial in his security clearance application. When he was interviewed by 
a security investigator in October 2010, the investigator had examined Appellant’s arrest 
record and knew about the arrest. They discussed the arrest and court proceedings 
during the interview. (Tr. 64-73) 
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol at approximately age 18. After entering the 
Navy, his consumption of alcohol was approximately 12 to 24 beers a weekend. After 
his discharge, he only consumed about two or three drinks about twice a month. He 
admits to becoming intoxicated on occasion. He is usually social and pleasant when 
intoxicated. In July 2001, while on active duty and after a domestic violence incident 
 
5 
 
 
with his wife, he self-referred to an alcohol prevention program in the Navy. He was sent 
to a Navy hospital for an intense inpatient program. He was diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent after successfully completing the 28-day program. The inpatient program 
was followed by an outpatient aftercare program. He successfully completed both 
programs. (SOR 3.a) After completion of the inpatient program, Applicant did not 
consume alcohol for over two years. He was involved in another domestic violence 
incident involving alcohol in March 2003. He successfully completed another outpatient 
alcohol treatment program. (SOR 3.b) He was involved in a third alcohol-related 
domestic violence incident in April 2006. (SOR 3.c) At that time, the medical personnel 
at the base hospital determined he was still alcohol dependent and an alcohol 
rehabilitation failure. (SOR 3.d) He was administratively separated from the Navy with a 
general discharge under honorable conditions due to alcohol rehabilitation failure. (SOR 
3.e; October 14, 2010 Interview with Security Investigator, Gov. Ex. 3, Response to 
Interrogatory, dated January 23, 2012) 
 
 Applicant did not consume alcohol while deployed to Iraq from 2007 until 
September 2009. Upon his return, he had problems concentrating, was nervous, and 
was having panic attacks. He knew something was not right and he was starting to use 
alcohol to calm his nerves. He went to the local Veterans Affairs Hospital and the 
medical personnel determined his problem was anxiety. They prescribed a daily 
medicine regimen to overcome anxiety and panic attacks. His medical records show he 
is continuing on his medication, keeping his scheduled medical appointments, and 
exhibiting good impulse control and judgment. He has abstained from alcohol 
consumption since 2009. Applicant notes his alcohol problems are behind him. (Tr. 28-
31; App. Ex. A, Medical Records, dated May 22, 2012)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
6 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct, Guideline J 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulation. (AG ¶ 30)  
 
 Applicant admits that he was arrested and convicted for minor criminal offenses 
from 1991, when he was a teenager, until 2006. Alcohol consumption was a factor in 
most of these offenses. Criminal records confirm most of these offenses. In May 2010, 
he was arrested and charged with showing obscene material to a minor under the age 
of 18. He pled guilty, and was sentenced on November 4, 2011, to a fine and probation 
for one year. He is on probation until November 3, 2012. The criminal conduct, arrests, 
and convictions raise Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 31(a) (a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses); AG 31(c) (allegations or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted; and AG 31(d) (individual is currently on parole or probation). 
 
I considered Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time 
has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement). These mitigating 
 
7 
 
 
conditions apply to the criminal conduct allegations in SOR 1.a to 1.f. These criminal 
activities happened from 6 to 21 years ago. The criminal incidents are all minor, many 
involving alcohol consumption, which Applicant has now overcome. The incidents were 
either usual teenage actions or involved domestic disputes. The circumstances leading 
to the offenses were unusual and not likely to recur. The criminal conduct security 
concerns expressed in SOR 1.a to SOR 1.f are mitigated. 
 
The criminal conduct security concern in SOR allegation 1.g is not mitigated. The 
incident happened only two years ago. It is serious criminal conduct involving a 38 year 
old man (Applicant) communicating obscene photographs with an underage girl. 
Applicant knowingly and willingly sent the images to the girl knowing she was probably 
underage. He was convicted of the offense and is still on probation. His conduct may 
recur, and it still casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He 
has not presented sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns expressed in 
SOR 1.g.  
 
Personal Conduct, Guideline E 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15) Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it addresses whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person 
can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. The security clearance 
system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a 
person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot 
function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the best 
interest of the United States Government.  
 
Applicant did not include his May 2010 arrest for showing obscene material to a 
minor under the age of 18 in response to a question on the security clearance 
application he signed on September 3, 2010, asking whether he had been issued a 
summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding, or is on trial or 
awaiting trial on criminal charges or awaiting sentencing. His failure raises Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
Applicant was advised of the criminal offense by police and went to the local 
police station with his attorney and bail bondsman in May 2010. He was arrested and 
processed. He appeared in court with his attorney in July 2010, pled not guilty to the 
offense, and was given a court date in September 2011. When he completed the 
 
8 
 
 
security clearance application in September 2010, he knew of the criminal offense. He 
admitted he was concerned and nervous because he could be incarcerated. In 
response to questions at the hearing, Applicant could not provide a rationale for why he 
did not include the offense on his security clearance application. The only logical 
answer and conclusion to be drawn is that he did not want others to know of the offense 
for fear he would not be granted a security clearance and lose his job. I find that he 
intentionally omitted vital security information on the security clearance application. 
 
I considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts; AG ¶ (17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶17(d) (the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur). These mitigating conditions do not apply. He could not explain his failure to 
include the arrest so his explanation for his oversight lacks credibility. Applicant 
intentionally omitted his arrest from the security clearance application. He noted that 
when questioned by a security investigator in November 2010, the investigator knew of 
the incident. This does not mitigate Applicant’s personal conduct since the investigator 
researched Applicant’s criminal conduct to prepare for his interview with Applicant. 
Applicant admitted his failure to include the arrest on the security clearance application 
only after being confronted with his failure by the security investigator. Applicant has not 
mitigated security concerns based on his personal conduct.  
 
Alcohol Consumption, Guideline G 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21) Applicant was 
involved in numerous incidents stemming from alcohol consumption from 2001 until 
2006 while in the Navy. He attended a Navy extensive in-patient treatment program, as 
well as extensive aftercare, and was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. After failing a 
second alcohol rehabilitation program, he was administratively discharged from the 
Navy for alcohol rehabilitation failure. Applicant's excessive consumption of alcohol, 
diagnosis as alcohol dependent, and discharge from the Navy for alcohol rehabilitation 
failure raise Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); and AG 
¶ 22(d) (diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence).  
 
 
9 
 
 
 I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23(a) (so much 
time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual 
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of 
action taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if 
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and AG 23(d) (the 
individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation 
along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendation, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization, 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program).  
 
 These mitigating condition apply. While there is no "bright line" rule for 
determining when conduct is recent or sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a 
determination whether past conduct affects an individual's present reliability and 
trustworthiness must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If 
the evidence shows a significant period of time has passed without evidence of 
misconduct, there must be an evaluation whether that period of time demonstrates 
changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to indicate a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation. Applicant did not consume alcohol while serving as a civilian in Iraq for 
two years from 2007 until 2009. When he returned in September 2009, he noticed that 
he was anxious and stressed and was turning to alcohol for a solution. He went to the 
local Veterans Affairs Hospital, was seen by a staff psychiatrist, and diagnosed with 
anxiety and stress. He was prescribed medication and has been taking his medicine as 
prescribed for over two years. He periodically sees his doctors for continued evaluation 
as ordered and required. He has not consumed alcohol in over three years. The last 
alcohol-related incident was over six years ago. He understands the stressors in his life 
that led to excessive alcohol consumption and learned to deal with the stressors without 
turning to alcohol. Applicant established that his life circumstances have changed since 
September 2009. He knows and understands the risk of alcohol consumption. The 
evidence shows a change of circumstances indicating Applicant has been reformed or 
rehabilitated. It is unlikely his previous alcohol consumption problems will recur. His 
present circumstances and lifestyle show that his past conduct does not now reflect 
adversely on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He established 
a clear pattern that he does not consume alcohol. In total, Applicant presented sufficient 
information to meet his burden to establish that his past alcohol use is under control and 
it does not reflect on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns for alcohol consumption. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
 
10 
 
 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s over seven 
years of active service in the Navy and his two years of civilian service in Iraq in support 
of soldiers. Applicant mitigated security concerns for his alcohol consumption based on 
the passage of time and rehabilitation. He mitigated most of his criminal conduct 
security concerns based on the passage of time and the minor nature of the offenses. 
However, he did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his criminal conduct of 
showing obscene photographs to an underage girl and his conviction for the offense for 
which he is still on probation. In addition he did not mitigate the security concern for his 
deliberate failure to include his arrest for this offense on his security clearance 
application. I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct and personal 
conduct security concerns. His failure to mitigate these concerns raises questions 
concerning his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. The record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a – 3.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
