 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-07015 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concern. She is a single mother 
who has raised four children on her own. Her past debts are largely attributable to the 
lack of financial support from her children’s father and her estranged husband’s 
wrongful act of removing the family from his health insurance. Applicant was left 
responsible for paying the medical bills for her children, which amounts to a significant 
portion of her outstanding debt. She has been making consistent, monthly debt 
repayments for the last 18 months and is in the process of resolving her financial 
situation. Clearance is granted. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 2, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), notifying her that it was unable to grant her a 
clearance because information from her background investigation raised the security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 Applicant’s Answer, wherein 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
 
2 
 
 
she requested a hearing before an administrative judge to present evidence to establish 
her eligibility for a clearance, was received by DOHA on August 3, 2012. 
 
 On September 1, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on September 7, 2012. After 
coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for October 4, 2012. At hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, called several witnesses, and offered 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through H, which were also admitted without objection.2 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 12, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old single mother who has raised four children on her own. 
Her eldest son is an adult, who lives on his own and is working. One of her other sons is 
going to college and is on the honor roll. Applicant still financially supports him. 
Applicant’s daughter recently graduated from high school and has a four-year-old child. 
Her youngest child is in middle school. Applicant’s daughter, her grandchild, and her 
youngest son live with her, and she is their sole source of financial support. She makes 
a concerted effort to make time for her children after work and on the weekends. (Tr. at 
37, 44, 53-54, 69) 
 
 Applicant’s financial trouble dates back to 2002, when the father of her three 
eldest children unexpectedly left the home. She was unable to afford the home they 
were living in and defaulted on the mortgage. She filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy and 
resolved her mortgage-related debt by paying per the terms of the bankruptcy plan from 
2002 to 2005. Applicant’s bankruptcy was discharged in September 2005. (Tr. at 41, 44, 
61-63; GE 8) 
 
 Applicant married her youngest child’s father in 2004, but they separated soon 
thereafter because he was abusive. Applicant’s estranged husband removed Applicant 
and her children, including his own child, from his health insurance. Applicant was 
unaware of this until one of her children was hospitalized. She was unable to afford the 
subsequent medical bills. Six of the debts listed in the SOR, totaling over $7,300, relate 
to medical bills.3 Applicant and her youngest children now have health insurance. (Tr. at 
44-46, 58-60, 75-76; GE 3; AE A at 3-7) 
 
 Applicant moved to State B in 2008, in order to be closer to her family, to provide 
for a better environment for her children, and because it was a more affordable location. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2
 At the request of the parties, I left the record open until October 19, 2012 to provide each side 
the opportunity to submit additional matters for my consideration. Neither side submitted additional 
matters and the record closed on October 19, 2012. (Tr. at 87-88, 93-97) 
 
3
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.p (medical-related debts). 
 
3 
 
 
She was unable to find a job near her new home and commutes nearly two hours each 
way to work. Applicant has been with her present employer for over seven years. 
Applicant’s supervisor testified on her behalf. The supervisor has worked with Applicant 
on a daily basis, over the past seven years and they have shared long hours at work 
together. Applicant is entrusted with safeguarding and handling highly sensitive 
information at work. She has not had any disciplinary or other issues at work, and 
routinely works a 12-hour shift. Applicant’s supervisor opined that Applicant is reliable 
and dependable, and has a strong work ethic. (Tr. at 26-33, 38, 70-71, 80-84) 
 
 Applicant does not have any credit cards and none of the SOR debts are related 
to extravagant or frivolous purchases. She does not purchase designer goods for 
herself or her children, and only buys the necessities they need. Applicant is thankful 
that her children understand when she tells them that she cannot afford to buy them 
certain things. Applicant has received child support on an infrequent basis and has not 
received any in several months. She has been unable to support herself and her 
children on her income alone. She disclosed her financial issues on her current security 
clearance application. (Tr. at 39, 43, 67-69; GE 1) 
 
Applicant’s car was repossessed in approximately January 2011. She 
established a repayment plan with the creditor in April 2011, made an initial payment of 
approximately $400, and has been paying on a monthly, consistent basis $150 a month. 
(Tr. at 40, 46-47, 56-58; GE 2 at 74) This is the largest debt listed on the SOR and the 
balance is down to $4,813.4 (AE C at 4) Once she finishes paying off this debt, 
Applicant plans on using the $150 to satisfy the other debts listed on the SOR that 
together total about $7,000.5 Applicant also submitted documentary proof of having paid 
or resolved other debts not listed on the SOR, and has not accumulated any other 
delinquent debt. She currently drives a used, 12-year-old model car and lives within her 
means. (Tr. at 46-53, 63-66, 77; AE A at 8; AE D; AE E; AE G; AE H) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
4
 SOR ¶ 1.m. 
 
5
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.f ($1,572), 1.n – 1.o ($2,591), 1.q – 1.t ($2,871). The delinquent utility bill to the 
same creditor referenced in both ¶ 1.f and ¶ 1.l are duplicates of the same debt. 
 
4 
 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions regarding an applicant’s suitability include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of a significant amount of 
debt, both medical and non-medical, raises this concern and establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”6 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are primarily due to matters beyond her control. 
Her eldest children’s father and her husband abandoned their families, and left 
Applicant to meet the heavy financial obligation of raising four children on her own. They 
have not paid their court-ordered child support and Applicant’s estranged husband 
wrongfully removed Applicant and her children from his health insurance. This left 
Applicant responsible for over $7,000 in medical bills or more than one-third of the total 
debt listed on the SOR. However, AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable because Applicant 
did not attempt to address her non-mortgage related debts until relatively recently. 
 
 Applicant met her burden in establishing AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d). She has 
reduced her expenses by moving to an area with a lower cost of living. She has 
resolved a number of other debts not listed on the SOR and has been paying the largest 
SOR debt on a consistent, monthly basis for the past 18 months. Applicant’s past debts 
are primarily related to living expenses, such as utilities and phone service, not frivolous 
or reckless spending that would evidence a lack of self-control. Although Applicant has 
not satisfied all her SOR debts, she is addressing her past debts with the limited 
disposable income that she has available. Based on Applicant’s 18-month track record 
of debt repayment and other concrete steps she has taken to address her debts, she 
established that her financial situation is in the process of being resolved. Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations concern and demonstrated that the circumstances 
                                                          
6
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
6 
 
 
that led to her financial trouble no longer casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 Applicant is a dependable, hard-working individual who 
has the full faith and trust of her employer. She has safeguarded and handled highly 
sensitive information without issue for the past seven years. She has raised four 
children on her own and placed their well-being above her own comfort, as evidenced 
by her recent move to a home that is nearly two hours away from her job. Such 
selflessness speaks volumes about Applicant’s character and ability to place her 
obligations above her own needs. Applicant answered the questions posed by the 
Government and myself in a straightforward fashion without making excuses or 
attempting in any way to minimize her responsibility in resolving her financial situation. 
Applicant’s past leaves me firmly convinced that she will discharge her security 
obligations in a responsible manner. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
