1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 11-02373
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows Applicant has a
history of drug abuse (use of marijuana) and a history of criminal conduct, neither of
which he fully disclosed when he completed a security clearance application in October
2010. He did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate the concerns about his fitness
and suitability to hold a security clearance. For the reasons discussed below, this case
is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which may be identified as exhibits in this decision.  
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on April 26, 2012,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a statement of
reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the security guidelines known
as Guideline H for drug involvement, Guideline J for criminal conduct, and Guideline E
for personal conduct.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR. Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel
requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On or about August 3, 2012, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and
material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant3
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it August 20, 2012. His reply to
the FORM consists of the following matters: (1) Exhibit A–Applicant’s written statement
declaring that any future use of marijuana will result in automatic revocation of a
security clearance; (2) Exhibit B–letter of reference from Applicant’s manager; (3)
Exhibit C–Applicant’s marriage certificate; (4) Exhibit D–birth certificate for Applicant’s
child; and (5) Exhibit E–eight certificates of completion related to job training. Those five
matters are admitted without objections. The case was assigned to me October 2, 2012.
Findings of Fact
The SOR, in general, alleged the following matters: (1) use of marijuana, with
varying frequency, from about 2001 to January 2010; (2) arrests for criminal conduct in
January 2005, April 2005, and May 2010; and (3) deliberate falsification of a security
clearance application by failure to fully disclose past marijuana use as well as the 2005
arrests for criminal conduct. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations with
explanations. His admissions and explanations are accepted and adopted and
incorporated as findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are supported
by substantial evidence.
 Exhibits C and D. 4
 Exhibits B. 5
 Exhibit 1. 6
 Exhibits 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. 7
 Exhibit 11. 8
 Exhibit E. 9
3
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His educational
background includes attending high school during 1999–2001, although he did not
obtain a diploma. He has been married since 2009, and he and his wife have one child.4
He has worked as a material coordinator for his current employer since September
2010. He has a good employment record in his current job.  Before that, he was self-5
employed as a computer technician and network administrator for several years. He is
seeking a security clearance for the first time, submitting an application in October
2010.6
In completing his security clearance application, Applicant was required to
answer multiple questions about his background and personal history, including
questions about use of illegal drugs and drug activity as well as his police record. He
answered in the affirmative to Questions 22a, 22b, and 22e about his police record. He
reported a 2010 conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), for which he
was convicted and was sentenced to four days in jail and 36 months probation. He
disclosed nothing more about his police record. He also answered in the affirmative to
Question 23a about illegal drugs. He reported using marijuana at a New Year’s Eve
party in December 2009–January 2010. He disclosed nothing more about his illegal
drug use or involvement.  
Subsequently, it was established that Applicant’s police record and marijuana
use were far more extensive than he reported in his security clearance application.  In7
addition to his 2010 DUI offense, in January 2005 he was arrested and charged with
burglary, furnishing liquor to a minor, conspiracy to commit a crime, and possession of a
controlled substance with intent to sell. And in April 2005, he was arrested and charged
with malicious destruction of property, vagrancy lodging, trespass, sale/furnish liquor to
a minor, and possession of one ounce or less of marijuana. Concerning his marijuana
use, he used marijuana during 2001–2010 as follows: (1) from the ages of 18–21, he
smoked marijuana three to four times weekly; (2) from the ages of 21–22, he smoked
marijuana three to four times monthly; (3) and from the age of 22 to the year 2010, he
smoked marijuana about once a year.8
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he has made mistakes and he
has been working for several years to better himself. In addition to his marriage and
becoming a father, he has furthered his education.  He stated that he no longer uses9
 Exhibit A. 10
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to11
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 19
4
marijuana and is a light drinker of alcohol. In his reply to the FORM, he included a
declaration wherein he agreed that any future use of marijuana will result in automatic
revocation a security clearance.  10
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As11
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt12
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An13
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  14
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting15
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An16
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate17
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme18
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.19
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).20
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.21
 AG ¶¶ 24–26 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 22
 AG ¶ 24(b). 23
 AG ¶ 25(a).  24
 AG ¶ 25(c).25
 AG ¶ 26(a)–(d).26
5
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.20
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it21
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline H,  the security concern is that the use of an illegal drug, or22
misuse of a prescription drug, raises questions about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. In this context, the term drug abuse means “the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from the approved medical
direction.”  The guideline also expresses a concern that drug involvement may call into23
question a person’s ability or willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations.
Here, the evidence is more than sufficient to establish security concerns based
on Applicant’s history of drug abuse.  The evidence shows he engaged in drug abuse24
by the periodic use of marijuana during 2001–2010. The last incident of marijuana use
took place just several months before he completed his October 2010 security
clearance application. And his drug abuse amounts to illegal conduct (possession and
use of marijuana),  which reflects poorly on his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness,25
and willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations.   
There are several mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline H.  Based26
on the record before me, none of the mitigating conditions apply fully to Applicant’s
 AG ¶¶  30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).27
 AG ¶¶ 15–17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 28
 AG ¶ 15. 29
6
case. With that said, the central issue here is whether Applicant presented sufficient
evidence to mitigate and overcome the security concerns raised by his history of drug
abuse. I conclude that he has not done so. He did not present sufficient evidence of
reform and rehabilitation to persuade me that his use of marijuana is safely in the past.
In particular, his December 2009–January 2010 marijuana use is troubling and raises
questions about his judgment, because it took place after his 2009 marriage, after the
birth of his child, and just months before he began employment for a federal contractor. 
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the security concern is that criminal27
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.
Applicant’s police record during 2005–2010 raises a legitimate security concern.
This is especially true in light of the ongoing 36-month period of probation. The facts
and circumstances surrounding Appellant’s police record fall under the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 31(a), (c), and (d).
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline J, and none,
individually or in combination, are sufficient to mitigate the criminal conduct security
concern. Applicant is serving probation until sometime in 2013, and it is too soon to tell
if he will complete it successfully. His status as a probationer strongly militates against a
favorable decision. What is missing here is a demonstrable track record of Applicant
conducting himself as a law-abiding person, preferably while no longer serving
probation. Until then, it is premature to conclude that he is suitable for security
clearance eligibility. 
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be28
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall security
concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  29
 AG ¶ 16(a). 30
 AG ¶ 17(a)–(g). 31
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).32
7
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if, for example, the
person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the
question, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported.
The issue here is whether Applicant made deliberately false statements when
completing his security clearance application by omitting his 2005 police record and by
omitting the full extent of his marijuana use. In deciding this issue, I have not had the
opportunity to consider testimony from Applicant and assess his credibility and
demeanor. I have considered both his admissions and his various explanations as set
forth in his answer to the SOR and during his background investigation. Based on the
record before me, I am not persuaded that his omissions were the result of genuine
forgetfulness or inattention, or were due to an honest mistake or misunderstanding. The
circumstances point to the conclusion that Applicant was minimizing the adverse
information he reported on his security clearance application. In other words, he
misrepresented the full extent of his police record and marijuana use because he knew
that full, frank, and truthful answers would reflect poorly on him. Accordingly, I conclude
that Applicant made deliberately false statements in response to questions about his
police record and his illegal drug use.   30
In reaching these conclusions, I considered all the mitigating conditions under
Guideline E,  and none, individually or in combination, are sufficient to overcome and31
mitigate the security concerns. Making a deliberately false statement to the federal
government during the security clearance process is serious misconduct, and it is not
easily explained away, extenuated, or mitigated.
Taken together, Applicant’s marijuana use, his police record (to include the
ongoing probation), and his deliberately false statements justify doubts about his
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this
conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence
outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the
whole-person concept.  Having done so, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his32
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
8
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 3.a–3.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
