 
1 
 
 
                                                             
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-03162 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines C (Foreign 
Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 3, 2010. On June 
4, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified him that it was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him access 
to classified information, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to grant or deny his application. DOHA 
set forth the basis for its action in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing security 
concerns under Guidelines C and B. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 13, 2012; answered it on June 14, 2012; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
June 18, 2012. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 1, 2012, and 
the case was assigned to me on September 7, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on September 20, 2012, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for October 11, 2012. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of 
one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted 
without objection. I held the record open until October 18, 2012, to enable Applicant to 
submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX G, H, and I, which 
were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX G, H, 
and I are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) II. (HX I is discussed below.) 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 26, 2012. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Israel. The request and the documents attached as enclosures to the request are 
attached to the record as HX I. Based on Department Counsel’s disclosure that HX I 
was not received by Applicant before the hearing, I provisionally granted the request to 
take administrative notice, but I gave Applicant seven calendar days to examine the 
request and supporting documentation and to submit any objections to my taking 
administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel. (Tr. 23.) Applicant did not 
submit any objections, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, but denied that the facts indicated a preference for a foreign country or made him 
vulnerable to foreign influence. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old consultant employed by a federal contractor since 
December 2009. He has a bachelor’s degree in political science and a master’s degree 
in international policy studies from U.S. universities, and he has worked as a consultant 
in democracy assistance for the last 12 years. (Tr. 48.) He was employed by a non-
government agency from July 2002 to April 2008. He served his last two years as a 
resident senior program manager in Afghanistan for democracy development programs 
funded by the U.S. Government. He held several key positions, frequently worked in 
dangerous situations, and had a reputation for faithful service and careful protection of 
confidential information. (AX D; AX E; AX F; Tr. 54.) He has never held a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant came from Israel to the United States with his parents in 1976, when 
he was three years old. He and his family lived in the United States for four years and 
 
3 
 
 
then returned to Israel in 1980. They returned to the United States in 1984, when 
Applicant was 11 years old, and they have lived in the United States since that time. His 
family spoke English rather than Hebrew at home. He became a U.S. citizen in 1999. 
He has visited Israel five times since 1984 for family-related reasons, and only once in 
the last 17 years. He last visited Israel in 2008, and he has no plans for future visits. (Tr. 
46-47.)  
 
 Applicant married in November 2005. His wife is a native of Sweden. She 
became a U.S. citizen in April 2012. (Tr. 28.) She recently completed law school in the 
United States and was admitted to practice in her current state of residence. (Tr. 32.) 
Applicant and his wife have a two-year-old son and are expecting a second child in 
October 2012.  
 
 Applicant’s parents and three siblings reside in the United States. His parents 
and younger brother are dual citizens of the United States and Israel. His father was 
born in Germany and his mother was born in South Africa. His younger brother was 
born in the United States. His older brother and his sister were born in Israel and are 
citizens of Israel residing permanently in the United States. (GX 1 at 37-39.) They do 
not intend to return to Israel, but they have not applied for U.S. citizenship because they 
are unwilling to swear that they will bear arms for the United States. (AX B; AX C; Tr. 
52-53.) 
 
 Applicant’s father is a medical doctor, and his mother is a school principal. His 
younger brother is a restaurant manager, his older brother works for a U.S.-based non-
profit company involved with youth programs, and his sister is a school teacher. (GX 2 
at 5-6.) 
 
 Applicant was issued a temporary Israeli passport in December 2007 that he 
used for a one-month trip to Israel in June and July 2008. When he entered Israel, he 
was required to show his U.S. passport, because his Israeli passport had no 
immigration stamps, indicating that he had a passport from another country. (Tr. 42.) 
During the trip, Applicant and his wife toured the country; visited an aunt, uncle, and two 
cousins who live in Israel; and stayed for seven to ten days with friends of Applicant’s 
parents. Applicant’s aunt and uncle are natives of South Africa who moved to Israel and 
became Israeli citizens. His aunt and uncle have a third child who lives in the United 
States. Applicant and his wife have not had any contact with his extended family in 
Israel since the June 2008 visit, except for email contact about once a year and seeing 
the aunt at another cousin’s wedding in Australia in December 2010. (Tr. 28-31, 49, 60.) 
 
Applicant’s Israeli passport expired in December 2008. During an unsworn 
personal subject interview in November 2010, Applicant stated that he was willing to 
relinquish his Israeli passport if necessary. (GX 2 at 7.) In response to DOHA 
interrogatories in March 2012, Applicant stated that he intended to renew his Israeli 
passport. He explained, “I have close family and friends who live in Israel, and whom I 
would like to visit in the future. The Israeli government requires that I enter Israel on my 
Israeli passport.” (GX 3 at 3.)  
 
4 
 
 
In response to additional interrogatories in April 2012, asking Applicant to identify 
his close friends, associates, and family members who are citizens or residents of 
Israel, he listed an aunt, an uncle, and two cousins who are citizens and residents of 
Israel, with whom he has email contact once a year. He also listed two friends who are 
Israeli citizens living in the United States, with whom he has face-to-face contact about 
twice a month. His aunt is a retired human resources manager for a U.S.-based 
computer software company. His uncle is a self-employed economist who previously 
worked for a government-owned coal company in Israel. One cousin is a privately-
employed occupational therapist. The other cousin is a marketing manager for an Israeli 
company. One friend is an “interaction designer” for a U.S. company, and the other is 
the deputy director of a “center for juvenile justice” in the United States. (GX 2 at 2; Tr. 
53.)  
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR in June 2012, he stated, “I have traveled to 
Israel twice in the last 20 years, both for holidays and to visit family and friends. If I want 
to travel to the country of my birth, even doing so infrequently, I am required to renew 
my passport. This is why I renewed it in 2007, and it is the reason why I may do so 
again some time in the future.” He subsequently learned that he can travel to Israel on a 
U.S. passport if he renounces his Israeli citizenship. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant considered renouncing his Israeli citizenship around 2006, because it 
was a liability while traveling in Afghanistan and Pakistan in connection with his 
employment. He travelled on his U.S. passport, but it reflected his birthplace as Israel. 
He mitigated the problem by having his U.S. passport changed to reflect the town where 
he was born instead of the country of Israel. (Tr. 34-35, 56.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant presented a sworn statement, declaring that he does 
not intend to renew his Israeli passport, is willing to surrender or destroy his expired 
Israeli passport, and is willing to renounce his Israeli citizenship. He further declared 
that he understands that for future travel to Israel he will be required to renounce his 
Israeli citizenship and enter Israel on his United States passport. Finally, he declared 
that his loyalty is solely to the United States. (AX A; Tr. 52.)  
 
After the hearing adjourned, Applicant went to the Israeli Consulate, where he 
obtained and completed a citizenship renunciation form. The consular officer informed 
him that he could not submit the renunciation form until he obtained documentation of 
his marriage and the birth of his son. Since the birth of his second child is imminent, he 
likely will be required to document the birth of this child as well. He was informed by the 
consular officer that the renunciation process usually takes about a year from the time 
an application is submitted. (AX H; AX I.) 
 
 Applicant has no property or financial interests in Israel. He lives in a rented 
apartment. He has a retirement account in the United States worth about $50,000. (Tr. 
65-67.)  
 
 
5 
 
 
 The United States and Israel, a parliamentary democracy, have a close 
relationship based on common democratic values and security interests. In 1948, the 
United States was the first country to officially recognize Israel.  
 
Despite the instability and armed conflict that have marked Israel’s relations 
within the region, Israel has developed a diversified, technologically advanced market 
economy. In 1985, Israel and the United States concluded a free trade agreement 
designed to strengthen economic ties by eliminating tariffs. The United States is Israel’s 
largest trading partner. In 2009, Israel imported $9.5 billion in goods from the United 
States and exported $18.7 billion in goods to the United States. From 1976-2004, Israel 
was the largest annual recipient of U.S. foreign assistance. Since 1985, the United 
States has provided nearly $3 billion in annual grants to Israel.  
 
 Almost all U.S. aid to Israel is in military assistance. Israel and the United States 
have concluded numerous treaties and agreements aimed at strengthening military ties. 
They have established joint groups to further military cooperation, participate in joint 
military exercises, and collaborate on military research and weapons development. The 
United States has pledged to ensure that Israel maintains a qualitative military edge 
over its neighbors.  
 
 Israel and the United States have serious disagreements on several issues 
involving national security. The United States is concerned about Israel’s military sales 
to China, Israel’s inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-
related incidents implicating Israeli officials. There have been several cases of U.S. 
citizens convicted of selling or attempting to sell classified documents to Israeli embassy 
officials, and Israeli nationals indicted for espionage against the United States. There 
also have been instances of illegal export or attempted export of U.S. restricted, dual-
use technology to Israel. 
 
 Several groups designated as foreign terrorist organizations by the U.S. 
Department of State operate in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza. On several occasions, 
they have kidnapped, injured, or killed tourists, students, residents, and U.S. 
government personnel. They have attacked highly frequented shopping areas, 
pedestrian areas, and public buses. They have used foreign hostages as bartering 
tools.  
 
 Israel strictly enforces security measures. U.S. visitors have experienced 
prolonged questioning and thorough searches upon entry or departure. Israel considers 
U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship to be Israeli citizens for immigration and 
other legal purposes. Israel generally respects the human rights of its citizens, but there 
have been allegations of mistreatment of Palestinian detainees and discrimination 
against Arab citizens. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
7 
 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was issued an Israeli passport in December 
2007, after he became a U.S. citizen, and he has expressed an intention to renew it. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). The concern under Guideline C is set out in AG ¶ 9: “When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”  
 
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse security 
clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 
2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual national, but 
rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country through actions.”  
ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1999). 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is not limited to countries hostile to the 
U.S. “Under the facts of a given case, an applicant’s preference, explicit or implied, 
even for a nation with which the U.S. has enjoyed long and peaceful relations, might 
pose a challenge to U.S. interests.” ADP Case No. 07-14939 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 
2009). 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1): exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen [including but not limited to] 
possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
AG ¶ 10(d): any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country 
other than the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) is established by the evidence that Applicant obtained and used an 
Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 10(d) is established by Applicant’s 
statement of intent to renew his Israeli passport.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 11(a): dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country;  
 
AG ¶ 11(b): the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
AG ¶ 11(c): exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor; and  
 
AG ¶ 11(e): the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant came to the United States with his family when he was 11 years old, 
and he has resided in the United States since that time. However, he exercised his 
Israeli citizenship by obtaining an Israeli passport in 2007, after he became a U.S. 
citizen. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 11(a) is not established. AG ¶ 11(b) is established 
because Applicant has declared his willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship and 
has taken the first steps in the renunciation process. AG ¶ 11(c) is not established 
because Applicant applied for, obtained, and used his Israeli passport after he became 
an adult. AG ¶ 11(e) is established because Applicant’s passport has expired and is 
invalid, and he has declared under oath that he does not intend to renew it.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s aunt, uncle, cousins, and friends are citizens 
and residents of Israel (SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.d). The security concern under this guideline is 
set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
9 
 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information.  
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant has extended family members who are citizens and residents of Israel, 
a country that has aggressively targeted the United States for industrial espionage and 
acquisition of sensitive technology. Insurgents in Israel have been known to target 
persons with connections to the United States. Although Applicant does not have 
frequent contact with his extended family, he described them as “close” family members 
in his responses to DOHA interrogatories. These circumstances are sufficient to 
establish the “heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and create the “potential conflict of interest” 
in AG ¶¶ 7(b). 
 
 
10 
 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 When family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign 
country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-
22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Applicant’s aunt and uncle are retired and have no 
connection to the Israeli government. His two cousins in Israel are not employed in high-
technology industries or connected to the Israeli government. There is no evidence that 
Israel abuses its own citizens to obtain economic intelligence or protected U.S. 
technology. The two “friends” alleged in the SOR reside in the United States and are not 
involved in jobs involving the type of information sought by Israel. I conclude that AG ¶ 
8(a) is established. 
 
 Applicant’s sense of obligation to his extended family in Israel is not “minimal.” 
However, he has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. 
He has lived most of his life in the United States and has been a citizen since 1999. He 
has been educated in the United States. He has spent most of his career as a 
consultant, advancing the goals of the United States. All his immediate family members 
reside in the United States. His parents and one sibling are citizens of the United 
States. His other two siblings are permanent residents of the United States. He has 
taken affirmative steps to renounce his Israeli citizenship. I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is 
established. 
 
Applicant’s contact with his aunt, uncle, and cousins in Israel is infrequent, but 
his description of them as “close” family members suggests that it is not casual. He 
maintains regular and frequent contact with his two friends who are Israeli citizens. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 8(c) is not established.  
 
 
11 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was sincere, candid, and credible at the hearing. His initial declaration 
that he intended to renew his expired Israeli passport was a demonstration of his 
understandable affinity for his country of birth. However, he has grown up in the United 
States, speaking English rather than Hebrew at home. His parents, spouse, child, and 
one sibling are citizens and residents of the United States. He has been educated in the 
United States and spent much of his professional life in support of U.S. interests. He 
has demonstrated his willingness to renounce his Israeli citizenship. His ties to the 
United States are much stronger than his ties to his extended family in Israel.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines C and 
B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign preference and foreign 
influence. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
