1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
      )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-08631
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Richard Murray, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline E
(Personal Conduct). The SOR was dated July 12, 2012. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 13, 2012. DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on September 20, 2012, scheduling the hearing for October
12, 2012. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-2 were admitted into evidence, without objection.
Applicant testified and presented two witnesses. He submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX)
A-C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on
October 18, 2012. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five factual allegations under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). He denied SOR 1.c, 1.e, 1.h and 1.i. with
explanations.
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor who works as a
computer scientist. After receiving his undergraduate degree in 2005, he obtained his
Ph.D in 2009. ( Tr. 17) He is married and has no children. Applicant has worked for his
current employer since February 2010. He  held an interim security clearance in 2003.
(GX 1) He has completed several security clearance applications. (Tr. 58)  
Personal Conduct
Applicant admitted using marijuana in 2004. (Tr. 21) He also smoked marijuana
with friends socially in high school and college.  He has never used any other illegal
drug. He also acknowledged that he intended to stop before the spring of 2009 but
made a more concerted decision after April 2010 (his polygraph interview). GX 2 
In June 2009, Applicant used marijuana at a party. (Tr. 23) He stated that he had
no intention of using marijuana but decided to “inhale” the marijuana in a bathroom
filled with the smoke so that technically he might later say he did not use the drug. (Tr.
24) He claims that he did not use marijuana on a regular basis in 2009.
He admitted the allegation that he continues to associate with persons who use
drugs but qualified the answer stating that he has not been around friends using drugs
since June 2009. He noted that he would leave the area if someone started using an
illegal drug. He was candid stating that his college and graduate school friends used
illegal drugs but he would try not to be around them. (Tr. 30)
Applicant described an incident where he used an open wireless network for
internet access without permission from the owner about four times from 2003 to 2007.
He used his personal computer at home or a coffee shop. He believed he was using
someone ‘s wireless, but he was not sure that was illegal.  He notes that is willing to
follow the rules.
Applicant admitted that he gave his step-mother a prescription drug (pain killer).
He knew that she wanted to use the drug for recreational purposes. He believes the
time frame was 2001 - 2005. He recalls that he gave her a bottle of percocet or vicodin.
(Tr. 31) He also noted that he would not care if someone stole the drug from him or
took it out of his trash. (Tr. 32) He stated that he would give a prescription drug to
someone if the circumstances called for it. He believes that if there is a medical need
and he has the prescription drug, that would be fine. 
Applicant began using alcohol in high school. He would drink with friends socially
once or twice a week.  He knows that he becomes intoxicated with six or seven drinks.
He acknowledges becoming intoxicated in the past. He admits that he did drink and
3
drive, but does not do so now. He has also limited his intake of alcohol. (Tr. ) He does
not have any alcohol-related incidents. He does not go to bars to drink and believes that
he drinks responsibly. 
As to the unauthorized access to another person’s computer account and
changing the password, he was credible in that this was a practical joke that he played
on his girlfriend. (Tr. 36) He recalls that it was 2000 or 2001. He thought that it would be
funny if she could not get into her email. He has never done anything like that again. 
Applicant acknowledged that he charged approximately 40 hours at work to the
wrong budget from May 2009 until August 2009. When he arrived at the lab, he was
told to charge everything to one budget. ( Tr. 37) He explained that he charged hours
from an internal source. He wanted to preserve the  budget as much as possible
because the project manager wanted to preserve it. The procedure for budgeting
according to Applicant was somewhat gray. He told his supervisor about the method he
used. He also noted that he was following his office-mate as a role model. (Tr. 38)
When Applicant told his supervisor, the supervisor stated that was fine. The billing
procedure has been clarified and the problem rectified. (Tr. 53) Applicant was not
reprimanded or disciplined. 
Applicant completed an SF-86 security clearance application in March 2010. In
response to Question 23, he disclosed his 2004 use of marijuana but did not list the
2009 use of marijuana. At first, he stated that he did not believe it would constitute
using marijuana. In his answer to the SOR, he denied that he intentionally falsified in
failing to disclose the recent use.  However, at the hearing he admitted that he should
have disclosed the 2009 use. Moreover, he believes that he had a secret clearance
when he started his current job. He knew that a recent use of marijuana would not allow
him to have a security clearance. He acknowledged after questioning that he did not put
the 2009 marijuana “inhaling” because he was scared that he would not get a
clearance. (Tr. 67) He was trying to convince himself that it did not count. He admitted
that he had an intention to not fully disclose the 2009 marijuana incident. (Tr. 68) He
acknowledged that he read the question, which clearly states that “inhaling” is
considered use. 
During an April 2010 interview, Applicant reported that at a party (June 2009)
after consuming an excessive amount of alcohol, his friends asked him to smoke
marijuana. He told the interviewer that he had no intention of smoking marijuana. He
elaborated that he intentionally inhaled the second-hand smoke in a bathroom. He now
believes that he was high on the marijuana. He noted that he mentioned telling his
friends they should “hotbox” the bathroom so that he could get high and still get a
security clearance. (GE 2) He also stated in the interview that he did not list the
information on his security clearance application because he feared that he might not
get his clearance, which would mean that he would not get a job. He also noted that he
was not being honest with himself. 
When questioned at the hearing, Applicant stated that he was concerned about
question 23 because he believed that any drug use in that year would affect his ability
4
to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 25) He explained that he was motivated to “not put it
on there.” (Tr. 26) He rationalized that he did not have to list the use because he was
not using a pipe. At the hearing, he stated that he recognized that it was a “non-candid”
thing to do. (Tr. 26) He knew that he would get denied for a security clearance if he
noted a 2009 marijuana use. 
 A former classmate of Applicant testified that Applicant is an honorable person
who strives to do the best.  He and his family socialize with Applicant. (Tr. 95) Applicant
revealed the SOR allegations to him and he believes that Applicant knew he did some
things wrong but does not believe he would do them again. He believes Applicant to be
an honest, highly intelligent, creative, and ethical person. (Tr. 97)
 
Applicant’s wife, who possesses a security clearance, testified that Applicant is
aware of mistakes that he has made. She discussed the SOR with Applicant.  She
noted that he went over the allegations in careful detail.  She noted that he put time and
energy into the unpleasant task of combing through his entire history and presenting all
necessary information. She believes he is a kind and genuine person. She states that
he is an honest person. (Tr. 110) She noted that  he was trying to decide whether or not
to list the 2009 marijuana incident on his security clearance application. (Tr. 114) 
Applicant submitted character references from his supervisors. He is described
as a meticulous, extremely hard-working, dedicated employee. His supervisor stated
that Applicant’s judgment has matured during the clearance process. She has observed
his personality, integrity, and judgment. (AX A-C) Applicant has been recognized as the
Most Outstanding Graduate in 2005. He has received scholarships. His peers describe
him as persevering and talented. 
. 
Applicant’s supervisor addressed the issue of the budget-charging procedures
that is referred to in the SOR. She explained in her letter that Applicant is now
meticulous in his timekeeping activities and carefully charges budgets at very fine-
grained increments.  (AX A) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
6
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
7
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
As discussed above, Applicant intentionally falsified his 2010 security clearance
by not disclosing his use of marijuana in 2009. He also rationalized and failed to provide
candid and truthful answers during the security process.  He acknowledged his poor
judgment in regard to the other allegations. AG ¶¶ 16(a),16(b),16(d)(3) and 16(g) apply.
His conduct shows a pattern of poor judgment.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
8
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant denied any intentional wrongdoing concerning the non-disclosure of
the 2009 marijuana incident until direct questioning at the hearing. As to the other
allegations, he has mitigated them based on the passage of time. He has not presented
any other information to persuade me that he has mitigated personal conduct concerns
regarding the falsification. I have doubts about his judgment, trustworthiness, and
reliability. After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concern under personal conduct as to
allegation 1.c. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 30-year-old professional who works as a computer scientist. He is highly
educated and well regarded in his field. He is married and has no children.  He loves his
work and looks forward to a career in his field. He acknowledges his poor judgment and
behavior concerning illegal drug use. He realizes that alcohol use needs to be
responsible. He believes that the majority of these above-noted incidents occurred
during or right after college. He is now married and would like to start a family. 
9
Applicant admitted that he intentionally falsified his security clearance application
in 2010. He did not disclose th drug use to the Government on his SF-86. He
rationalized that he did not have  to because he just inhaled and had no intention of
becoming high. He knew that it would cause him to be denied a security clearance. The
other choices he made over the years indicate immaturity, but he has acknowledged his
behavior. He understands the consequences of that behavior. His recent falsification
outweighs any other behavior and is not mitigated. I have doubts about his judgment.
Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government. Applicant has not met his
burden in this case. He has not mitigated the security concerns under personal
conduct. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph   1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d:-1.i: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
