 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-00483 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct and Financial Considerations 
concerns. He was involved in an alcohol-related accident while on duty in 2010 and 
continues to deny he was drinking prior to the accident. His credit card has been in 
collection status since 2009 and he has yet to take any concrete action to resolve the 
debt. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On March 16, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), notifying him that it was unable to grant him a 
clearance because information from his background investigation raised the security 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).1 Applicant’s Answer, wherein he requested a hearing, was received by 
DOHA on April 18, 2012. 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 1, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed with a hearing. I was assigned the case on September 7, 2012. After 
coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for October 4, 2012.2  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 8, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 
A – B, which were also admitted without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left 
the record open to provide the parties an opportunity to submit additional matters for my 
consideration. Applicant submitted a letter from his attorney, dated October 16, 2012, 
which was admitted, without objection, as AE C.3 The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
October 12, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old truck driver working for a DoD contractor since August 
2010. He has been with his wife for nearly 25 years and they have two adult children. 
His financial trouble started four to five years ago when his wife got sick and could no 
longer work. Applicant’s previous employer then cut back on his hours and his pay 
decreased by about half. Applicant started using his credit card to pay the bills and then 
eventually stopped paying his credit card bill. His credit card account is currently in 
collection status, with a balance of a little over $9,000. (Tr. at 26-27, 52, 69-76; GE 1) 
 
In September 2010, Applicant told an investigator conducting his background 
interview that he had already contacted the creditor for the delinquent credit card 
account and was in the process of settling the debt. He told the investigator that he 
would start repaying the debt by November 2010. (GE 2, Subject Interview) In 
December 2011, Applicant informed DOHA that he had hired counsel and that his 
counsel was attempting to work out a repayment plan with his creditor to resolve his 
delinquent credit card account “ASAP.” (GE 2 at 1)4 Applicant’s attorney has advised 
Applicant and his wife not to pay their debts because they are “judgment proof,” and the 
statute of limitations on their delinquent accounts will expire in about 10 months. (AE C) 
Applicant’s wife’s medical bills total between $75,000 and $100,000. Applicant’s 
delinquent credit card remains unresolved. (Tr. at 52-56, 71, 76; Answer) 
 
Prior to starting with his current employer, Applicant worked for another trucking 
company from 2006 to 2010. In February 2009, Applicant received a written warning for 
purportedly making an indecent comment to a woman at one of his delivery locations. 
Applicant denies he actually made any such comment and claims that the woman was 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2
 Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. (Tr. at 8-9) 
 
3
 The Government did not submit additional matters and the record closed on October 19, 2012.  
 
4
 See also GE 3 (“We are working with our lawyer to consolidate bills and work out a payment 
plan and hopefully avoid bankruptcy.”)  
 
3 
 
 
the sexual aggressor. Applicant was led to believe by his former employer that they 
were issuing him a written warning to quell a client’s complaint and not due to any 
actual misconduct on his part. (Tr. at 27, 40, 69; GE 1; GE 6) 
 
In May 2010, at approximately 1030, Applicant was involved in a traffic accident 
while on duty and driving a truck for his former employer. It is unclear who was at fault 
in the accident. The police investigated the accident and, while questioning Applicant, 
smelled alcohol on his breadth. Applicant agreed to take a field sobriety test and a 
breathalyzer at the scene. Applicant’s blood alcohol content (BAC) at the scene was a 
.069. Applicant was arrested for driving a commercial vehicle under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI). At approximately 1300, Applicant’s blood was drawn at a local hospital 
and it was tested for the presence of alcohol. Applicant’s lab results registered a BAC of 
.066. Applicant went to trial and, after hearing the police officer’s testimony, a judge 
dismissed the DUI charge. (GE 5; Tr. at 29-35, 61-65) Applicant was told by his attorney 
that he would not have to disclose this information on future job applications, because 
he had not been convicted of the charge. (Tr. at 44-46) During his background interview 
and at hearing, Applicant claimed that the only alcohol he consumed prior to the 
accident was two to three beers the night before, while mowing his lawn. (Tr. at 12-13, 
30-31, 56-57; GE 2) Applicant has had no other alcohol-related incidents and is subject 
to no-notice alcohol and drug testing at his current job. (Tr. at 50, 67-69) 
 
 Applicant was fired by his former employer two days after he was arrested on the 
DUI charges. (GE 6; Tr. at 27-28, 61, 81-82) Applicant did not list his adverse 
employment history and his DUI charge on his security clearance application (SCA). 
(GE 1; Tr. at 35-50, 61) Applicant explained that his omission of this adverse 
information was unintentional. This was Applicant’s first SCA. Applicant’s only prior 
experience in filling out such forms were with job applications for truck driver positions 
that are at most two pages in length and do not require the detail asked for in a SCA. 
(Tr. at 57, 65-67) Applicant readily admits, and it was clearly apparent at hearing, that 
he is “not very good at paper work.” (Tr. at 46) Applicant filled out the SCA to the best of 
his knowledge and belief, and disclosed adverse information to questions that he 
understood, including revealing his delinquent credit card account. (GE 1 at 39) 
 
 Applicant’s current employment is over 1,100 miles from his home. His 
stepmother has moved in with his wife to help reduce expenses. He does not own a 
vehicle and lives in a motel that is provided to him by his employer. He lives modestly, 
shopping at the local Walmart for his groceries and other necessities. He has seen his 
wife twice this past year. He is trying to make as much money as possible to pay his 
debts. He sends his wife his paycheck and she is responsible for managing the couple’s 
finances. (Tr. at 57-60, 71-73) Applicant’s current supervisor, who has known him for 
the past two years, writes that Applicant is “dependable, reliable, hard-working, 
trustworthy, and very helpful.” (AE A) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions regarding an applicant’s suitability include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16. Applicant’s purported dishonesty on his SCA and misleading 
statements during his background investigation invokes AG ¶¶ 16(a)5 and 16(b).6 His 
alcohol-related incident and purported workplace misconduct raise the applicability of 
AG ¶ 16(c).7 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA. An applicant should disclose any potential 
derogatory information. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified his or 
her SCA. Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.8 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately fail to disclose his DUI charge and adverse 
employment information on his SCA. He is not a sophisticated individual and this was 
his first application for a security clearance. He genuinely did not believe the omitted 
information had to be disclosed in response to the relevant questions at issue. His 
misunderstanding was partly attributable to his attorney’s prior advice that the DUI 
charge did not need to be listed on future employment applications because he had not 
been convicted of the charge. SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d are decided in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Applicant’s purported indecent comment in February 2009 does not raise a 
security concern. After observing Applicant’s demeanor while he testified and after 
questioning him myself, I found his denial of said misconduct credible. Moreover, 
assuming such reprehensible conduct did occur, the incident took place nearly four 
years ago and there have been no further incidents of a similar nature. SOR ¶ 1.g is 
decided in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Applicant’s 2010 alcohol-related accident while on duty appears to have been a 
one time, isolated incident. Furthermore, Applicant has been subject to no-notice 
alcohol and drug testing for the past two years at his current job without recurrence of a 
                                                          
5
 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
6
 Deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
7
 Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an 
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports 
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not safeguard protected information. 
 
8
 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
 
6 
 
 
similar incident.9 However, Applicant denied during his background interview and at 
hearing that he had consumed alcohol prior to the accident. Applicant’s claim is 
contradicted by the overwhelming weight of the evidence. Specifically, the observations 
of the police officers who arrested him at the scene and the breathalyzer results that 
showed he had far more alcohol in his system than would be expected of an individual 
who had supposedly consumed just two to three beers, some 12 or more hours before 
the accident. Applicant submitted no evidence to refute the Government’s evidence.10 
Applicant’s refusal to accept responsibility for his actions that led to the accident 
demonstrates that he is not rehabilitated and the mere passage of time alone does not 
mitigate his conduct. Moreover, Applicant’s misleading statements during his 
background investigation that he only had two to three beers to drink the night before 
the accident raises concerns about his credibility. Applicant was given ample 
opportunity at hearing to correct this misleading information, but he continues to claim 
that the only alcohol he drank prior to the accident was the night before while mowing 
his lawn. Consequently, SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h are decided against Applicant. In 
addition, I find that AG ¶¶ 16(b) and 16(c) apply and none of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct concern.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s delinquent credit card account raises 
this concern and establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
                                                          
9
 See AG ¶ 17(c): “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” I specifically considered this 
mitigating condition and, for the reasons noted above, do not find it is warranted in this case. 
 
10
 Although the DUI charge was dismissed, Applicant failed to submit proof that such dismissal 
was based on a finding of actual innocence or proof of actual innocence. ISCR Case No. 08-09337 at 2 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2009) (due to the different burdens of proof, DOHA judges are not bound by a not 
guilty verdict). See also ISCR Case No. 11-03025 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2012) (even though there was 
no conviction and applicant denied the SOR allegation, DOHA judge properly found applicant committed 
alleged criminal offense based on evidence at hearing); ISCR Case No. 11-00391 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 
2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, 
the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant to mitigate the concern.”)  
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”11 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are primarily due to matters beyond his control, 
namely, his wife’s medical issues that resulted in her inability to work and mounting 
medical debts. Applicant used his credit card to pay their expenses. When he was 
unable to pay his debts, Applicant sought legal counsel who advised him not to pay his 
bills, including his delinquent credit card account. Even after Applicant was advised of 
the Government’s concerns regarding his delinquent credit card account, his attorney 
continued to advise him not to pay the debt because his overdue creditor would soon be 
without legal recourse to force him to pay it. This aspect of Applicant’s case is 
admittedly a close call, especially in light of the sacrifices Applicant has made to provide 
for his family and the non-frivolous nature of the overdue debt at issue. However, 
Applicant has been gainfully employed for the past two years and submitted no 
evidence of having made a good-faith effort to repay his delinquent credit card account. 
Applicant’s decision not to pay his financial obligation leaves me with doubts as to 
whether he would similarly disregard his security obligation if provided advice that would 
presumably absolve him of such responsibility. I must resolve such doubt in favor of 
                                                          
11
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
8 
 
 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). Accordingly, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
financial considerations concern and his financial situation remains a concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).12 Applicant is a hard working individual who is dedicated 
to his family and his job. He has been entrusted with sensitive information and cargo 
over the past two years without incident. However, this favorable evidence, as well as 
the other mitigating record evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d and 1.g:             For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h:              Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:           Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is hereby denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) 
the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
(5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
