 
 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00801 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lawrence A. Berger, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 25, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. Applicant previous had access to classified information but 
his eligibility for such access had been revoked. After an investigation conducted by the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued to Applicant interrogatories to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying 
information. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant's 
response to the interrogatories, DOHA could not find that it is clearly consistent to 
continue his security clearance. On February 24, 2012, DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for personal conduct under 
Guideline E. These actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
 
 
 
2 
 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 26, 2012. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 26, 2012. He denied two and admitted 
one of the allegations concerning personal conduct under Guideline E. He requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on June 4, 2012. The case was assigned to me on June 27, 2012. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on June 28, 2012, for a hearing on July 26, 2012. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. The Government offered ten exhibits, which I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 
10. Applicant and eight witnesses testified. Applicant offered five exhibits which I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A 
through E. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 16, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted one allegation of misconduct 
under personal conduct, but denied the other two allegations. His admission is included 
in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 36 years old and received a bachelor’s degree in English in 1999. He 
served on active duty in the Air Force for six years as a security officer and criminal 
investigator. After leaving active duty, he worked various civilian jobs, including a six-
month tour in Iraq from February 2006 until July 2006 as a civilian explosive ordnance 
disposal technician. He became a civilian special investigator for the Air Force in August 
2006. He was assigned at a base in the United States until September 2008 when he 
volunteered for assignment to Afghanistan. He is married with two children. (Tr. 111-
113; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated May 25, 2010) 
 
Applicant was removed from federal employment by the Air Force on May 26, 
2009, for misconduct. He allegedly physically and emotionally abused suspected 
Taliban detainees during an interrogation. He appealed his removal to the Merit 
Systems Protection Board (MSPB). A hearing was held before an administrative judge 
who found that Applicant’s conduct was serious misconduct and behavior unbecoming a 
federal employee. The administrative judge upheld the removal on January 5, 2010. 
Applicant appealed the decision, and the administrative judge’s decision was upheld by 
the MSPB Appeal Board on July 2, 2010. Applicant started working for his present 
defense contractor employer as a compliance officer in August 2009. He requires 
access to classified information in this position. (Tr. 113-116, 145-146; Gov. Ex. 7, 
Removal Notice, dated February 27, 2009; Gov. Ex. 8, Decision to remove, dated May 
26, 2009; Gov. Ex. 9, Decision, dated January 5, 2010: Gov. Ex. 10, Final Order, dated 
July 2, 2010)  
 
 
 
3 
 
As a civilian criminal investigator in Afghanistan, Applicant’s duties were “to 
collect counterintelligence to protect Department of Defense personnel and assets.” He 
was a civilian employee and was not “in uniform,” even though his supervisor was an 
active duty airman. He was not a combatant. He received counter-terrorism training, but 
not prisoner interrogation technique training. He was assigned to a base in Kandahar 
Province, Afghanistan, in September 2008. He was partnered with another criminal 
investigator who he served with previously. Applicant’s partner had arrived in 
Afghanistan a few months before him. (Tr. 113-116; Gov. Ex. 5, Course Student 
Evaluation, dated April 4, 2008) 
 
In October and November 2008, Applicant and his partner cultivated a source 
that had provided information enabling the agents to seize a large cache of illegal drugs. 
They were also able to provide additional information from their source to other 
intelligence teams for exploitation. The local populous engaged in criminal activity put a 
bounty on Applicant’s and his partner’s death. Their source had been compromised and 
had outlived his usefulness. They were visiting the source to thank him for his 
information when a group led by a local Taliban warlord arrived. The warlord was being 
sought by special operating forces for some time. Applicant and his partner 
apprehended the warlord and turned him over to special operating forces. The capture 
of the warlord doubled the Taliban bounty on them. (Tr. 116-122) 
Applicant’s command policy required the members of the command to comply 
with the Law of War regarding the treatment of detainees. The command prohibited 
physical or mental torture or other form of coercion. Detainees who refuse to answer 
questions may not be threatened, insulted, or exposed to unpleasant or 
disadvantageous treatment of any kind. Weapons may be drawn only if the situation 
could reasonably escalate to the use of deadly force. Only the minimum force 
necessary to deal with the threat was to be used. The command directive requires that 
any misconduct or violation of detainee policy be promptly reported through command 
channels and investigated thoroughly. (Gov. Ex. 3, Memorandum, dated August 14, 
2006; Gov. Ex. 5, AFOSI Manual 71-113, dated August 9, 2005)   
A few days after the completion of this mission, Applicant’s command was 
notified that a police chief in a village about 12 kilometers away had apprehended and 
was holding some individuals that may be Taliban. Applicant was directed to go to the 
police station and interrogate the prisoners to gain intelligence. His normal partner was 
sick, so Appellant teamed with another special agent (SA K), who had recently arrived 
in Afghanistan and had not been on a mission off the base. They were accompanied by 
interpreters and a local Afghan security team. Applicant was the primary interrogator 
and the other agent was the note taker. SA K was also to provide security for Applicant. 
(Tr. 122-125) 
When Applicant and SA K arrived at the police station, the detainees were 
brought separately to them for interrogation. Applicant, SA K, an interpreter, and some 
members of the Afghan security team were in the interrogation room. The detainees 
were not forthcoming with information. Applicant got close in the face of each prisoner, 
 
 
 
4 
 
poked some in the face or chest, and yelled at them. He pinned one detainee to the wall 
with his arm on the detainee’s neck. As the detainees were being interrogated, 
Applicant asked each “tell me why I should not kill you now?” The police chief claimed 
that the leader may be the chief of the Taliban in the region and a high-value target for 
exploitation. If the individual was the leader, he had been sought by allied forces for 
some time. When the alleged leader would not talk, Applicant drew his service pistol, 
placed it on the detainee’s forearm, and asked again why he should not kill him. 
Applicant and his team were unable to gain any useful information so the team left and 
returned safely to their base. (Tr. 125-136) 
Applicant stated that he needed to get good actionable intelligence from the 
detainees because the local police were not trustworthy and they were in a non-secure 
compound. He was in fear for his life and the lives of his men. The local enemy knew 
what routes they would take returning to their base and had spotters out to watch them. 
He was not thinking of rules but just wanted good information to navigate a safe route 
back to base. Based on what he did learn from the detainees, he was able to select a 
route to return safely to their base. When the team returned to base, they were pleased 
with a safe return and a job well done. (Tr. 136-140) 
SA K testified in a subsequent Air Force investigation into the incident and at the 
MSPB hearing. He stated that he was Applicant’s partner on the interrogation mission 
and witnessed Applicant poke some of the detainees in the face and grab some 
detainees around the neck asking if they could feel the pressure. Applicant asked 
multiple detainees to give him a reason not to kill them right then. SA K testified he 
witnessed Applicant pull his duty weapon from his holster and place it on the arm of a 
detainee asking the detainee to tell him why he should not kill him. SA K testified that he 
advised Applicant to watch what he was doing and to take it easy. Applicant replied to 
the effect that this is how he does business and why he gets good information. 
Applicant also asked him numerous times not to tell anyone what happened, particularly 
their supervisory agent. (Gov. Ex. 6, Air Force Report of Investigation, dated January 6, 
2009 at 5 and 6 and SA K statement at 5-7) On returning to base, SA K sought 
guidance from another agent regarding the reporting of the incident. He reported 
Applicant’s conduct as required by policy to the supervisory agent the day after the 
incident. Applicant denied in the investigation, at the MSPB hearing, and at the DOHA 
hearing that he asked SA K not to report the incident to the command. (Go. Ex. 6, Air 
Force Report of Investigation, dated January 6, 2009, at 7 and at exhibit 8; Gov. Ex. 9. 
Decision, dated January 5, 2010 at 2-4) 
Applicant testified in both the Air Force investigation and the MSPB hearing. 
Applicant initially denied any involvement in detainee abuse when questioned for the Air 
Force investigation. However, in preparing a written statement for the investigation, 
Applicant admitted becoming increasingly angry at the detainees during the questioning. 
He had previously seen some coworkers killed by terrorists. He felt the detainees were 
tied to the same network that had been responsible for the injury and death of his 
coworkers. He raised his voice to detainees. He lost his balance while questioning a 
detainee resulting in him pressing the detainee against the wall. He acknowledged 
 
 
 
5 
 
placing his duty weapon on the forearm of a detainee after he became frustrated with 
the interrogation. While acknowledging some of his conduct towards detainees, 
Applicant stated his actions were intended to obtain more and better information from 
the detainees. He admits that some of his actions showed poor judgment.  
Applicant did not deny his conduct against the detainees in the MSPB hearing. 
He admitted holding his arm across the face or neck of one detainee, and drawing his 
weapon placing it on the forearm of a detainee, and asking the detainees “give me one 
reason why I shouldn’t shoot you right now.” He testified that he was following directions 
to use appropriate force to prevent harm to American and coalition personnel. He said 
the situation required him to threaten detainees to collect sufficient information to make 
a safe exit back to his base. During the interviews, he was in fear of his life, so he felt 
drawing his weapon was justified. He admitted losing control of his emotions. He 
admitted that all of his training had been pointed to avoiding coercion of suspects and 
detainees. (Gov. Ex. 9, MSPB Decision, dated January 5, 2010, at 5-6)  
Applicant presented evidence that Kandahar province was a dangerous place 
when he was assigned to the region. Coalition forces were conducting a drug eradiation 
mission in the area. (App. Ex. A, Eradication Map, dated 2007) He presented pictures of 
police vehicles recently blown up by Improvised Explosive Devices (IED) in the area in 
which four Afghan police officers were killed. (Tr. 59-63; App. Ex. B, C, and D, Pictures, 
undated)  
Witnesses testified to the dangerous situation in Kandahar Province. A former 
Navy SEAL chief petty officer testified he served five deployments to Afghanistan and is 
familiar with Kandahar Province. There is a threat to military and civilian personnel from 
road-side bombs and small arms weapons in the province. Insurgents are active in the 
area and it is a stronghold of the Taliban. There is a high level of corruption in the police 
force and they are not to be trusted. Since coalition forces have become more 
sophisticated in stopping road side bombs detonation by cell phones, the insurgents 
have turned to using ‘”spotters” to detonate bombs. He has known and worked with 
Applicant for over six months and finds him to be trustworthy with integrity. (Tr. 36-48).    
An employee of Applicant’s defense contractor employer testified that he 
previously served in the Army and the Marine Corps. He was a civilian contractor in 
Afghanistan working on drug eradication in Kandahar Province for over 27 months. In 
the province, there were threats against coalition forces from IEDs, small arms fire, 
kidnappings, and ambushes. The enemy does not distinguish between military and 
civilians in taking actions. In fact, he feels civilians are at greater risk of enemy action. 
The rules of engagement were that deadly force could be used if they were in danger of 
death or serious bodily harm. He has known Applicant for over three years and believes 
he is an outstanding person with absolute trustworthiness. (Tr. 53-68) 
A retired Army veteran with over 22 years of service testified that he has 
previously served in Kandahar Province. The threat level of death or serious bodily 
harm to coalition forces in the area is extremely high. He first served in the area in 2002 
 
 
 
6 
 
and the threat level has continued to increase. The local police are untrustworthy. He 
has known Applicant for some time and he believes Applicant has great veracity and is 
trustworthy. (Tr. 76-80) 
The President and CEO of Applicant’s employing company testified that he has 
known Applicant for over three years. He hired Applicant to be his compliance officer. 
The regulations the company must operate under for International Trade in Arms Traffic 
are complex and difficult. Applicant’s duties are to insure that the company is in 
compliance with all Government requirements. Applicant is the company’s liaison with 
all branches of the Government in Washington. In this capacity, Applicant has been 
honest and trustworthy. If a mistake is made, the company would be in grave danger of 
losing business. He has complete trust and confidence in Applicant. (Tr. 81-92) 
An Air Force captain assigned as an Air Force criminal investigator testified that 
he has known and worked with Applicant for over six years. He has never seen 
Applicant abuse or misuse information. Applicant had a stellar record and reputation as 
an agent. Applicant’s reputation in the agency for trustworthiness and veracity is good. 
The witness has complete trust in Applicant. (Tr. 48-51) 
The chief operating officer for Applicant’s employer testified that he previously 
served in the Marine Corps. He has known Applicant for over two years, and has 
observed him on a daily basis. He has nothing but the highest respect for Applicant. 
Applicant told him about the circumstances of his problem from his time in Afghanistan. 
The witness understands that the situation was completely investigated and due 
process was provided. The results of the situation do not affect his opinion that 
Applicant is trustworthy and honest, and exercises good judgment. (Tr. 92-101) 
The executive vice president of Applicant’s employer testified that he was a 
college classmate of Applicant’s and recommended him for a position with his company. 
Applicant informed him and the company of his problems from Afghanistan and that he 
was not eligible for access to classified information. He has observed Applicant since he 
came to work with the company, and he has no concern with Applicant having access to 
classified information. (Tr. 101-106) 
The facility security officer for Applicant’s employer testified that he has known 
Applicant for the three years Applicant has worked for the company. He sees Applicant 
on a daily basis. He believes Applicant is an honest person and he recommends him for 
access to classified information. (Tr. 106-110) 
Applicant presented letters of recommendation. His former Air Force 
commander, and the person who removed him from federal service, recommends that 
Applicant’s access to classified information not be revoked. Three other people, who 
worked with Applicant when he was a criminal investigator and counterterrorism official, 
wrote that Applicant was professional, personable, and dedicated. He never gave them 
any reason to doubt his truthfulness or integrity. Applicant was a good worker whose 
performance reports were excellent. They know of no incidents when Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
mishandled classified information. They have no doubt that he has the credibility and 
integrity to have access to classified information. (App. Ex. E, Letters, various dates) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks 
the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence the person can 
be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. (AG ¶ 15)   
 
Applicant was terminated from his civilian position with the Air Force for 
mistreating Taliban detainees in Afghanistan in December 2008 in violation of Air Force 
regulations. This incident raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(c) 
(credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for 
an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered 
as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information); AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not 
explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicting that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations); and AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing).  
 
 The incident was investigated by the Air Force and Applicant’s Air Force 
employment was terminated. He appealed the termination to the proper Government 
agency which, after a hearing, upheld the termination. Based on this information, the 
Government produced sufficient evidence to establish the disqualifying conditions as 
required in AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e). The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under financial 
considerations. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove 
a mitigating condition, and the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the 
Government. Applicant raised conditions that may mitigate the security concern 
 
 I have considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense 
is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶17(d) (the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
 
 
 
9 
 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur); AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress); and AG ¶ 17(f) 
(the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability). These 
mitigating conditions do not apply.  
 
  Applicant acknowledged and admitted his actions against detainees that were in 
violation of his command’s regulations and directives. The misconduct is not minor 
since it violated policy on treatment of detainees and potentially the Law of War. The 
incident is recent, happening less than four years ago. The information is substantiated 
since it was fully investigated and Applicant acknowledged his conduct. The 
circumstances were not unique. The conditions in the area of Afghanistan where 
Applicant operated were dangerous with the potential for death and serious bodily harm 
from various Taliban activities. But Applicant was on the type of mission he had been on 
in the past and that was normal for the command. Even though he felt fear and that he 
and his team were in danger, it was the normal circumstance and condition for the team 
and that part of Afghanistan. I do not second-guess that Applicant felt he was in danger 
of death or serious injury on the mission. The circumstances were what was expected 
and why the detainee humane treatment policy was instituted by his command. 
Applicant knew he had a problem with his conduct with the detainees before he even 
left the interrogation site. He compounded the problem by attempting to have a fellow 
agent not report the detainee abuse as required by command directives. He never 
acknowledged this aspect of his conduct. However, it is evident that Applicant 
understood he violated policy in his treatment of the detainees and did not want the 
command to know. He had an obligation by policy to report his misconduct with the 
detainees. He knew that if reported his career may be in jeopardy. SA K had a duty and 
obligation to report Applicant’s misconduct. Applicant attempted to have SA K not make 
the required report. Applicant has failed to present sufficient information to mitigate the 
security concerns based on his conduct for personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
10 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant served 
on active duty in the Air Force, and volunteered as a civilian Government employee for 
dangerous service in Afghanistan. I considered the information provided by his 
supervisors, friends, and fellow employees concerning his work ethic and performance, 
as well as his reputation for honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness. The incident in 
question is a serious breach of policy and potentially violated the Law of War. It could 
have an adverse effect on future efforts of coalition forces. Applicant’s behavior was 
reckless, irresponsible, and showed poor judgment. He only acknowledged his 
misconduct after it was reported to his command. He did not report it himself as 
required by policy. His action toward the detainees and his attempt to have SA K not 
report the incident indicates that he has questionable judgment, may be untrustworthy, 
lacks reliability, and is unwilling to comply with rules and regulations. The incident raises 
questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. The incident indicates he may not properly handle, manage, or safeguard 
classified information. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
