 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-06260    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on incriminating comments attributed to Applicant during an interview with 
another government agency in 2010, his security clearance and access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI) were revoked. However, Applicant did not engage in 
criminal conduct nor did he have the specific intent to do so. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 13, 
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the sexual behavior and personal 
conduct guidelines. DOHA recommended the case be submitted to an administrative 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
judge for a determination to revoke or continue Applicant’s access to classified 
information.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative 
determination. Under the Directive, Department Counsel timely requested a hearing.2 
The case was assigned to me on April 19, 2012. The hearing took place as scheduled 
on June 20, 2012. At hearing, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through L, without objection. After the hearing, I received AE 
M without objection. I have appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) A, a 
memorandum prepared by Applicant’s counsel. I received the transcript (Tr.) on June 
28, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 29, is a consultant employed by a federal contractor. He is unmarried 
and has no children. Initially granted a security clearance in 2004, another government 
agency (OGA 1) granted him SCI access in 2009. In anticipation of an upcoming 
project, Applicant’s employer nominated him for SCI access from a second government 
agency (OGA 2) in November 2009.3  
  
 In conjunction with OGA 2’s investigation, Applicant underwent a routine lifestyle 
polygraph in March 2010, which also included a post-polygraph interview. Applicant, 
then 26 years old, disclosed that during the previous four years he regularly viewed 
pornographic videos on the Internet, primarily accessed through two websites. He 
discovered one website through a generic online search for pornographic videos. He 
learned of the other site from his then girlfriend. Applicant revealed that some of the 
categories of pornographic videos he often watched and received sexual gratification 
from contained the word “teen.” Applicant recalls being asked by the investigator if the 
females in the videos were over 18 and if the two websites were in compliance with 18 
U.S.C. §2257, a statute that aims to ensure that pornographic material on the Internet 
does not contain minors by imposing name-and-age-verification, recordkeeping, and 
labeling requirements on producers of visual depictions of actual human beings 
engaged in actual or simulated sexually explicit conduct. At the time of the interview, 
Applicant did not know the answer to either question and could not provide a definitive 
answer. Upon being prompted by the interviewer and concerned that he may have 
unintentionally viewed videos containing underage females, Applicant guessed the ages 
of the females in the videos he watched.4 
 
 According to the interviewer’s report, Applicant stated that “approximately once 
per week he [would] come across a video that involve[d] the participation of females 
under the age of 18, approximately 16 or 17 years old.” The decision also indicates that 
Applicant intentionally clicked on “teen” categories approximately once per month to see 
                                                          
2 Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Enclosure 3 ¶ E3.1.7. 
  
3 Tr. 35-36; GE 1, 7. 
 
4 Tr. 39-43, 57; GE 7, 9-10; Answer: Attachment A. 
 
3 
 
a 16 or 17 year old engaged in sexually explicit conduct. Applicant estimated the ages 
of the females depicted in the videos based on their appearances. He told the 
investigator that sometimes he could not visually determine the ages of the females in 
the video, but assumed they were at least 16. He also believed that some of the videos 
he watched contained women pretending to be teenagers. He denied ever viewing 
pornographic videos or images of prepubescent girls. When he encountered an image 
of females that appeared to him as being 15 years old or younger, he became 
uncomfortable and immediately closed the image because it did not give him sexual 
pleasure. Applicant did not have the opportunity to review or sign the statements 
contained in the interviewer’s report.5 
 
 After the interview, Applicant checked the two websites for the required 
disclosure statements and found that both websites were in compliance with the statute. 
Applicant concluded that he incorrectly assumed that some of the females in the “teen” 
themed videos were underage and that he did not view any child pornography. He also 
believed that because the websites he disclosed in his interview were in compliance 
with the federal statute, that his viewing of the videos did not raise a security issue. 
However, he did not have any means to contact OGA 2 to correct his interview 
statements. He assumed that he would have the chance to do so in a follow-up 
interview, a practice he believed was common based on his understanding of the OGA 
2 investigation process.6  
 
 However, in April 2010, OGA 2 issued a Clearance Decision Statement denying 
Applicant’s access to SCI because of his involvement in “apparent criminal sexual 
behavior through his viewing of probable child pornography”, relying only on the March 
2010 interview. Based on this denial, the Defense Security Service (DSS) suspended 
Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant requested OGA 2 review its decision because 
the statements he made in his interview were made in ignorance of the websites’ 
compliance with the federal recordkeeping statute, making it highly unlikely that he 
actually viewed child pornography. He also reported that he had taken steps to avoid 
any confusion regarding the pornographic content he viewed by purchasing, as 
recommended by the OGA 2 interviewer, a subscription to the website of a longstanding 
and well known adult entertainment company. In its First Appeal Review in February 
2011, OGA 2 upheld the initial Clearance Decision Statement finding that Applicant did 
not meet the standards of Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 704 that the “subject 
must be stable, trustworthy, reliable, discreet, of excellent character, and sound 
judgment . . . .” Applicant did not appeal this decision because he was no longer eligible 
for the project being offered by his employer. In March 2011, OGA 2 issued a Final 
Outcome of Appeal Case memorandum upholding the agency’s original denial 
decision.7  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 38; GE 7; Answer: Attachment A. 
 
6 Tr. 50-51; GE 6, 9-10; AE J, L. 
 
7 Tr. 51-53, 69; GE 3-5, 7-8. 
 
 
4 
 
 Unbeknownst to Applicant, OGA 2 referred him to the state police, who then 
contacted the prosecutor’s office in Applicant’s county of residence for further 
investigation. In August 2010, two detectives came unannounced to Applicant’s home at 
six o’clock in the morning to investigate the child pornography allegations. Applicant 
explained that he erroneously thought that he viewed pornographic videos containing 
underage females. He assured the detectives that he did not possess any child 
pornography. Applicant consented to an on-the-spot search of all of his computers. The 
detectives searched the images of each hard drive visually and used forensic software 
to execute searches using the terms “teen” and “pre-teen.” They found no evidence of 
child pornography.8  
 
 Applicant denies having looked at or searched for child pornography. At hearing, 
Applicant talked openly and without embarrassment about his pornography viewing 
habits. Applicant was unable to recall many details of the OGA 2 interview, which 
occurred over two years ago. He does not recall his statements that he intentionally 
sought out images of 16-and-17-year-old females. While he admits he told the OGA 2 
investigator that he viewed some pornographic videos in categorizes labeled “teen”, he 
testified that he intended to see 18-and-19-year-olds, not minors. He affirmed his 
previous statements that images containing actors that appeared too young, even if 
they were over 18, made him uncomfortable, did not give him any sexual pleasure, and 
that he would not view the content.9  
 
 Applicant presented a letter from an attorney who is an expert in computer 
forensics and the legal and cultural implications of emerging technologies with an 
emphasis on the operation of the online adult industry. In this capacity, the expert has 
also studied the mechanisms by which contraband material is created and distributed 
around the world. He has worked as an expert witness in the defense of obscenity and 
child pornography cases. He has also delivered legal seminars at the adult industry’s 
annual trade show focusing on the potential for federal criminal prosecution of adult 
webmasters, particularly following the adoption of regulations to enforce 18 U.S.C. § 
2257. He served as an expert consultant to the U.S. Department of Justice during the 
litigation of the Child Online Protection Act, teaching workshops to federal prosecutors 
on the operations of the online adult industry. The expert is extensively published in 
areas related to constitutional law and has published a book on the economics of the 
online adult entertainment industry.10 
 
 After reviewing the two interviews Applicant gave to investigators from the Office 
of Personnel Management,11 the SOR, and Applicant’s response to the SOR, the expert 
determined that it is unlikely Applicant actually viewed any child pornography. He 
explained that the two websites Applicant used to view pornographic material are well 
                                                          
8 Tr. 53-56; AE M. 
 
9 Tr. 43-50, 63-65, 78-86. 
 
10 AE C- F. 
 
11 These interviews are included in the record as GE 9-10. 
 
 
5 
 
known and have been existence for over a decade. Given the lengthy existence and 
high-profile status of the websites, there is strong incentive to comply with the record 
keeping requirements of 18 U.S.C. § 2257. The risks of hosting or producing 
contraband material, significant fines as well as prosecution on federal child 
pornography charges, is outweighed by the profitability of fantasy content, which uses, 
for example, women who are 18 and over, but look two to four years younger. This 
content, the expert explains, is factually and legally distinct from child pornography—the 
visual depiction of sexually explicit conduct involving the use of a minor engaging in 
sexually explicit conduct.12 
 
 The expert also observed, based on his ten years of experience working on 
computer forensics cases involving child pornography, that Applicant’s actions are not 
consistent with someone interested in viewing child pornography. The expert noted, for 
example, that there is no evidence to indicate that Applicant has trolled message boards 
looking for child pornography websites, executed web searches for child pornography, 
traded or maintained a cache of illegal images sometimes necessary to gain access to 
child pornography sites, or purchased contraband content through surreptitious 
international transactions.13  
 
 Applicant still views pornography, albeit with less frequency than in the past, 
through the same subscription service he purchased after the OGA 2 interview. He does 
not believe that the allegations that he viewed child pornography are a potential source 
of exploitation for him. He reported all of the issues raised by his OGA 2 interview and 
shared all of the resulting correspondence with his facility security officer (FSO). He also 
reported to the FSO his contact with the detectives who searched his computers. He 
voluntarily provided copies of the documentation he received from OGA 2 to DOHA in 
his Answer to the SOR, even though it contained potentially disqualifying information. 
Although he has not told his parents about the OGA 2 allegations, he has shared them 
with his professional mentor, now retired, who hired and formerly managed Applicant at 
his current job, and two of his close friends, all of whom recommend him for access to 
classified information.14  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
12 AE C. 
 
13 AE C. 
 
14 Tr. 24-32, 53, 57, 66, 70 – 71, 91-92; Answer: Attachment B; AE G. 
 
6 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The concern regarding an applicant’s sexual behavior is explained in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in the Guideline may be raised solely on the 
bases of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
Three of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13 are relevant to this case: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflect lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 
7 
 
The SOR alleges that between 2005 and 2010, Applicant intentionally visited 
websites to view images and pornographic videos depicting minor females. Applicant 
denies the allegation. The SOR allegation is based on OGA 2’s decision to deny 
Applicant’s access to SCI on the grounds that he engaged in “apparent criminal sexual 
behavior though his viewing of probable child pornography.” OGA’s 2 findings and 
conclusions were based on a limited record—the March 2010 post-polygraph interview. 
However, the record in this case supports a finding that Applicant did not actually view 
child pornography or engage in any criminal conduct. After his interview with OGA 2, 
Applicant verified that the two websites he disclosed in the interview were in compliance 
with 18 U.S.C. §2257, leading him to conclude that he did not actually view child 
pornography and that he underestimated the ages of the women appearing the videos. 
His conclusion is corroborated by the letter from the expert witness that it is more than 
likely that Applicant viewed fantasy, not contraband materials. Finally and most 
importantly, the visual and forensic search conducted of Applicant’s personal computers 
by law enforcement did not yield any evidence of child pornography. 
 
Although Applicant did not engage in conduct disqualifying under AG ¶ 13(a), 
Department Counsel argues that the specific intent to view child pornography is 
disqualifying under AG 13 ¶¶ (c) and (d). Indeed, the statements contained in the 
clearance decision statement are serious, potentially disqualifying, and cannot be 
ignored. Given that these admissions could have negative personal consequences, 
including the loss of his security clearance and exposure to criminal charges, it is 
reasonable to assume that Applicant would not have made statements regarding his 
intent to view child pornography if they were not true. Absent any indicia of irregularity 
or misbehavior, the clearance decision statement produced by OGA 2 is granted a high 
level of credibility and reliability. However, this does not mean that the document is 
sacrosanct or that the statements therein attributable to Applicant should not be 
considered in the light of the contrary evidence in the same record—a record 
unavailable to OGA 2 when evaluating Applicant’s suitability for SCI access.  
 
Here, the inculpatory statements recorded during the OGA 2 interview must be 
considered along with the conflicting statements made in the same interview, evidence 
showing Applicant’s intent to avoid contraband materials, and the negative results of the 
forensic search conducted by law enforcement. Also, accepting the statements alone as 
evidence of Applicant’s specific intent to view illegal images requires drawing inferences 
not supported by the record evidence. Applicant’s acts of avoidance would have to be 
characterized as contrived and calculated to give the appearance of innocence—an 
unreasonable inference given that Applicant spoke openly and with candor about his 
use of pornography in a manner not usually employed by an individual engaging in 
morally repugnant, let alone illegal behavior. Also, Applicant would have had to employ 
evasive measures to render years of illegal conduct undetectable by the forensic search 
conducted by law enforcement. This is also unlikely given that Applicant did not have 
any prior knowledge of the law enforcement referral or the resulting search of his 
personal computers. When considered as a whole, the record does not support a 
finding that Applicant had the specific intent to view child pornography. 
 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The findings in the clearance decision statement regarding Applicant’s intent to 
view child pornography raises concerns under AG ¶ 15 because it denotes, “[c]onduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations,” which in turn “can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” However, none of 
the personal conduct disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant did not actually 
view child pornography nor did he have the intent to do so, as explained above.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 After considering the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2, I have no reservations 
about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. While Applicant’s predilection for fantasy adult entertainment may be 
unsavory, it is not criminal or disqualifying. Given the openness with which he discussed 
his pornography habits, his disclosure of the allegations to his FSO, mentor, and at least 
two close friends, it is not likely that either his sexual fantasies or his regular viewing of 
pornography are a potential source of exploitation.  
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a.:      For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:      For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
                                               
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
