 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01086 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on March 5, 2012.2 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him a set 
of interrogatories. He responded to those interrogatories on April 2, 2012.3 On May 21, 
2012, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated February 2, 2010). 
 
2
 GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 5, 2012). 
 
3
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 2, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 
1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why DOHA 
was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 30, 2012. In a sworn 
statement, dated June 19, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On July 19, 2012, Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to 
me on August 9, 2012. A Notice of Hearing was issued on September 5, 2012, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on September 26, 2012. 
 
 During the hearing, 5 Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5) and 11 Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE K) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 2, 2012. I kept the record open to 
enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity, and he 
submitted 6 additional exhibits (AE L through AE Q) that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 23 (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.w.) of the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR. He denied the sole 
factual allegation pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 2.a.). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since February 
2000, has served as a senior quality assurance engineer. He was previously employed 
by other employers in various positions, including facility manager, safety manager, 
process engineer, and industrial engineer. He has never served in the U.S. military. He 
has held a secret security clearance since 2000.4 Applicant put himself through school 
while working full-time, and received a Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering in 
1996. He is currently working on a graduate degree in industrial engineering 
management.  
 
                                                          
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 35. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Applicant was married in June 2002, and he has two children (a son, born in 
2003, and a daughter, born in 2009), as well as a stepdaughter (born in 1996). He is 
very involved in his children’s activities, and has served as a coach for the two older 
children.  
 
Financial Considerations 
There apparently was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 
2001.5 Applicant’s wife was involved in the first of two serious automobile accidents in 
August 2001, when she was rear-ended by an inattentive elderly driver playing with a 
dog while driving. She was rear-ended again in April 2004, when another elderly driver 
with a recent hip replacement, who was not supposed to be driving, was unable to stop 
his vehicle. The combined accidents caused crippling and costly injuries to Applicant’s 
wife, and “changed our life forever.”6 She also has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia, a 
syndrome involving long-term, body-wide pain and tenderness in the joints, muscles, 
tendons, and other soft tissues. Because of the continuing back pain, caused in part, by 
two slipped disks and muscle damage in her back, Applicant’s wife receives between 30 
and 60 injections each month to enable her to walk, as well as daily pain medication 
simply to get her through the day.7 As a direct result of the injuries sustained in those 
accidents, as well as her fibromyalgia, Applicant’s wife is no longer able to work, 
reducing the two family incomes to one income. Applicant spends in excess of $5,000 
each year simply to cover his wife’s medical expenses.8  
In 2009, Applicant’s medical expenses increased. His stepdaughter broke her 
foot playing softball and his son required ear surgery. There were complications during 
the birth of his daughter, and she had to undergo therapy for a condition known as 
torticollis. The following year, his stepdaughter was struck twice in the face by softballs, 
requiring reconstructive jaw and nose surgery, and his son also underwent surgery. In 
2011, his stepdaughter received braces on her teeth, and his son again had ear 
surgery.9 All of the medical and dental procedures for his children were unexpected and 
costly. 
  
The increasing medical expenses have had a “snowball effect,” and Applicant 
now spends about $9,000 to $10,000 per year on just medical expenses which are not 
covered by insurance.10 In addition, there are the typical household and automobile 
expenditures. The family car, a 2001 minivan, had to be replaced because the 
                                                          
5
 Tr. at 49. Applicant explained that bills were being paid on time and “everything was good.” 
 
6
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 9; GE 3, supra note 2, at 8; Tr. at 49. 
 
7
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 9; GE 3, supra note 2, at 8. See also, AE E (Letter from Doctor, dated July 18, 
2012); AE D (Medical Report, dated September 25, 2012); AE F (MediFile, undated). 
 
8
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 9; GE 3, supra note 2, at 8. 
 
9
 GE 2, supra note 3, at 9; GE 3, supra note 2, at 8; Tr. at 43-45. 
 
10
 Tr. at 51. 
 
4 
                                      
 
transmission and air conditioner both failed.11 As a result of the drain on his finances, 
Applicant fell behind on his every-day bills, and accounts started to become delinquent, 
and were placed for collection or charged off.  
 
Applicant contacted a variety of collection agents regarding his delinquent 
accounts. They generally demanded either payment in full or a discounted amount 
divided into substantial equal payments in amounts Applicant was unable to afford.12 At 
some unspecified point, Applicant attempted to obtain a consolidation loan to enable 
him to address his delinquent debts, but he did not qualify for one.13 He also went to a 
financial counselor to assist him, but he was unable to come up with the necessary 
money the counselor wanted in order to work with him.14 Applicant eventually found 
another financial counselor, and that counselor is guiding him with a debt repayment 
plan by prioritizing accounts in order to pay them in full and to improve his credit.15 
Applicant sought guidance from a bankruptcy attorney, but decided against avoiding his 
debts under Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.16 Instead, he takes full 
responsibility for his debts, and intends to pay them off one bill at a time.17 At some 
unspecified point, Applicant withdrew $29,440.98 (actually $23,552.78 after the federal 
tax was withheld) from his 401(k) retirement account, the maximum amount available, in 
order to pay some bills.18 Although Applicant is “living paycheck to paycheck,” he has 
been paying off various smaller accounts, as well as other accounts that are apparently 
not listed in the SOR, with the intention of eventually addressing the larger accounts.19 
 
In March 2011, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting a 
net monthly income of $3,430.0620 He claimed $2,145 in monthly expenses, as well as 
$1,210 in mortgage payments.21 He had approximately $75 left over each month for 
discretionary spending or savings.  
 
                                                          
 
11
 Tr. at 51. 
 
12
 Tr. at 52. 
 
13
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 8, 2010), at 1. 
 
14
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 13, at 1. 
 
15
 GE 3, supra note 2, at 8. 
 
16
 Tr. at 43; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 13, at 1. 
 
17
 Tr. at 43; GE 3, supra note 2, at 8; GE 2, supra note 3, at 9. 
 
18
 GE 3 (Request a Withdrawal, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
19
 AE B (Letter from Creditor, dated September 20, 2012); Tr. at 52-53, 58. 
  
20
 GE 4 (Personal Financial Statement, dated March 30, 2011),  
 
21
 GE 4 (Personal Financial Statement), supra note 20.  
 
 
5 
                                      
 
The SOR identified 23 purportedly continuing delinquencies, totaling 
approximately $41,465.22 Three of the accounts listed (SOR && 1.a., 1.p., and 1.v.) are 
clearly variations of the same account under the name of the original creditor or the 
collection agent, listed either with partial account numbers or extended account 
numbers.23 In March 2011, Applicant and the collection agent entered into an 
agreement to resolve the account, and on March 16, 2011, Applicant paid the collection 
agent attorney $2,000, settling the account.24 Two other accounts, one with the same 
creditor (SOR & 1.f.), and the other with the same collection agent (SOR & 1.w.), are 
listed with different account numbers. Based on the agreed amount paid under the 
settlement agreement, it appears that all of the accounts with the combination of original 
creditor and subsequent collection agent, totaling $3,797, have been included, and 
resolved. Unfortunately, because of his fear of losing his security clearance, Applicant 
has faithfully accepted the allegations set forth in the SOR as accurate and has recently 
also paid the collection agent an additional $20 in a good-faith effort to resolve all of 
those accounts erroneously listed in the SOR.25 Those five separate accounts listed in 
the SOR have been resolved. 
 
 There is a department store account (SOR & 1.b.) listed in the credit report by a 
collection agent with a high credit of $5,174 and an unpaid balance of $5,973.26 There is 
evidence that an account with the same original creditor and current collection agent, 
with a different account number, but with no specified balance, was settled in full in 
March 2008.27 Again, because of his fear of losing his security clearance, Applicant 
recently paid the collection agent an additional $10 in a good-faith effort to resolve the 
account.28 The account has either been resolved or is in the process of being resolved. 
 
                                                          
22
 The accounts identified in the SOR were apparently based upon accounts listed in an Equifax Credit 
Report, dated March 20, 2012 (GE 5) as well as upon certain unidentified documentation used by the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator who interviewed Applicant in March 2010. During the interview, Applicant 
was asked about certain accounts and acknowledged the information furnished to him by the investigator. In 
reviewing the information which Applicant acknowledged, it is apparent that much of it does not identify the original 
creditors. For example, Applicant agreed that he had opened certain accounts with specified “creditors,” but the 
purported “creditors” have never issued credit cards for they are merely debt collectors or debt purchasers. In 
addition, because GE 5 furnishes only the barest of information, it is difficult, if not impossible, to determine if one 
account is actually listed several times under various collector names, giving the impression that there are more 
accounts than there actually are. 
 
23
 GE 5, supra note 22, at 2-3. The account is listed in the credit report under one entry with a high credit of 
$1,186 and an unpaid balance of $1,464, and in the other entry with a zero balance as the account had been 
“transferred or sold.” The SOR refers to the account in two separate allegations (SOR && 1.a. and 1.p.) with an 
unpaid balance of $1,185, and in a separate allegation (SOR & 1.v.) with an unpaid balance of $1,464.  
 
24
 GE 4 (Settlement Stipulation Fax, dated March 15, 2011; Letter to Attorney, dated March 16, 2011; 
Stipulation of Settlement, dated March 16, 2011); AE N (photocopies of the stipulation documents). 
 
25
 AE L (Checks, dated October 9, 2012). 
 
26
 GE 5, supra note 22, at 3. The credit report listed the account with a partial account number and the SOR 
used an extended account number. 
 
27
 AE P (Letter from Collection Agent, dated October 9, 2012). 
 
28
 AE L, supra note 25. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
There is an account with a bank with an unpaid balance of $3,506 that was 
charged off (SOR & 1.c.). No such account is listed in the credit report. There is 
evidence that an account with the same original creditor with a different account 
number, but with no specified balance, was settled in full in February 2008.29 It appears 
that the account has been resolved.  
 
There are two club super store accounts (SOR && 1.d. and 1.m.) listed in the 
SOR under the name of the same creditor with different account numbers and different 
unpaid balances. One account reflects a $47 balance and the other, a $1,000 balance. 
The credit report lists only one such account, with a balance of $400, that was 
transferred of sold.30 Applicant recently paid the creditor $10 in a good-faith effort to 
resolve the account.31 The account is in the process of being resolved. 
 
There is a super store account (SOR & 1.e.) listed in the SOR with a charged-off 
balance of $1,744. No such account is listed in the credit report.  Applicant recently paid 
the creditor $10 in a good-faith effort to resolve the account.32 The account is in the 
process of being resolved. 
 
There is a bank account (SOR & 1.g.) listed in the SOR with an unpaid balance 
of $9,665 that is listed in the credit report under the collection agent’s name.33 Applicant 
recently paid the creditor $10 in a good-faith effort to resolve the account.34 The account 
is in the process of being resolved. 
 
There is a bank account (SOR & 1.k.) listed in the SOR with an unpaid balance 
of $143. Although the account was transferred or sold to a number of different collection 
agents, no such account is listed in the credit report. In September 2012, Applicant and 
the collection agent entered into a settlement and repayment agreement to resolve the 
account. In October 2012, Applicant paid the collection agent two $37.23 payments, 
settling the account.35  The account has been resolved. 
 
There is a charge account (SOR & 1.t.) listed in the SOR with a charged-off 
balance of $146.36 Applicant recently paid the creditor $10 in a good-faith effort to 
resolve the account.37 The account is in the process of being resolved. 
                                                          
29
 AE Q (Letter from Collection Agent, dated October 9, 2012). 
 
30
 GE 5, supra note 22, at 2. The account listed in the credit report is the same one referred to in SOR with 
the $1,000 balance, although the account number in the SOR is extended. 
 
31
 AE L, supra note 25. 
 
32
 AE L, supra note 25. 
 
33
 GE 5, supra note 22, at 2. The account listed in the credit report reflects a high credit of $7,737, and the 
account number is a briefer version of the one in the SOR. 
 
34
 AE L, supra note 25. 
 
35
 AE A (Settlement Offer, dated September 11, 2012); AE O (Letter from Collection Agent, dated 
September 27, 2012); Tr. at 55. 
 
36
 GE 5, supra note 22, at 1. 
 
7 
                                      
 
 
There is a charge account (SOR & 1.u.) listed in the SOR with a charged-off 
balance of $135 that was transferred or sold.38 Applicant recently paid the collection 
agent $10 in a good-faith effort to resolve the account.39 The account is in the process 
of being resolved. 
 
According to Applicant, the remaining delinquent accounts are in line to be 
addressed when other accounts, currently being addressed, are resolved, or when he 
has sufficient funds to resolve them earlier. Those accounts, in varying amounts from 
$65 (SOR & 1.s.), $140 (SOR & 1.r.), $158 (SOR & 1.q.), $169 (SOR & 1.o.), $170 
(SOR & 1.n.), $312 (SOR & 1.j.), $1,506 (SOR & 1.l.), $4,371 (SOR & 1.h.), and $4,975 
(SOR & 1.i.), were allegedly placed for collection or charged off. Some of those 
accounts are not listed in the credit report.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
On July 7, 2003, Applicant and his wife were purportedly involved in an 
altercation. Applicant was arrested and charged with aggravated battery on a pregnant 
woman. The charges were dismissed and Applicant was not adjudicated guilty of that 
charge or of any of the acts stemming from the arrest or the alleged criminal activity. On 
February 13, 2006, Applicant petitioned to seal the criminal history record, and the court 
ordered the records be sealed.40 Applicant contends he was falsely accused, the 
charges were “thrown out,” and the records were expunged.41 He also discussed the 
matter with his attorney because he was concerned about his security clearance. 
Applicant’s attorney advised him that since the record had been expunged, it no longer 
exists, and Applicant did not have to report it.42 
 
When Applicant completed his SF 86 in February 2010, there was a question 
('22c) asking: “Have you EVER been charged with a felony offense?”43 The introductory 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
37
 AE L, supra note 25. 
 
38
 GE 5, supra note 22, at 2. 
 
39
 AE L, supra note 25. 
 
40
 AE C (Order to Seal Records and accompanying documents, various dates). Under the state’s rules, all 
entries and records subject to the order are removed from the official records of the court, the clerk is to make 
certified copies of the file and expunge the original entries and records, and seal the entries and records, or certified 
copies thereof, together with the court file and retain the same in a nonpublic index, subject to further order of the 
court. Under the state law in question, a person commits aggravated battery – a first degree misdemeanor - if the 
alleged victim was pregnant at the time of the incident and the offender knew or should have known that the victim 
was pregnant. What would normally be a simple battery (a striking or touching without any real harm), becomes 
aggravated battery – a second degree felony. 
 
41
 Tr. at 64-65. 
 
42
 Tr. at 65, 67; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 2. 
 
43
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 33. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
comments to the question stated: “For this item, report information regardless of 
whether the record in your case has been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from 
the court record, or the charge was dismissed.”44 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant falsified material facts regarding the incident when he 
responded “no” to the question. He explained that he was simply following the legal 
guidance he had previously received from his attorney in 2006.45 He also noted that the 
introductory comments said matters expunged did not have to be reported.46 The 
section of the introductory comment he referred to actually stated: “You need not report 
convictions under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.”47 As noted 
by Department Counsel, this exception refers to drug charges, not aggravated battery 
charges. Applicant stated that when he saw that comment, he was confused and 
thought it also applied to him.48 He also denied he had been charged with a felony 
because he was not convicted of any charge.49 Applicant consistently denied intending 
to falsify the material facts.50 Applicant’s alleged conduct, under the evidence 
presented, would have constituted aberrant behavior on his part.  
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
 The three most important components in Applicant’s life are God, his family, and 
his work.51 His supervisor characterized him in very favorable terms. Applicant’s key 
strengths are that he is a “devoted and dedicated hard worker,” and he is “very honest 
and ethical.”52 Over the past few years, Applicant has received several individual and 
team achievement awards, as well as certificates of appreciation.53 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
                                                          
44
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 33. 
 
45
 Tr. at 67-70. 
 
46
 Tr. at 70-71. 
 
47
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 33. 
 
48
 Tr. at 71. 
 
49
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 42, at 2. 
 
50
 GE 3, supra note 2, at 9-10. 
 
51
 Tr. at 42-43. 
 
52
 AE H (Performance Development Summary, dated February 17, 2011); AE I (Performance Development 
Summary, dated February 23, 2012. 
 
53
 AE J (Certificates, various dates). 
 
9 
                                      
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”54 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”55   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”56 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.57  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
                                                          
54
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
55
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
56
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
57
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”58 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”59 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Commencing in 2001, Applicant started experiencing some financial 
difficulties, and over the next few years those difficulties increased to the point where he 
was unable to make routine monthly payments for a number of accounts. His accounts 
eventually started becoming delinquent and were placed for collection or charged off. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
                                                          
58
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
59
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@60  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies, and AG ¶ 20(c) applies. The nature, frequency, and 
relative recency of Applicant’s continuing and escalating financial difficulties since 
August 2001 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” Aware of his family’s substantial medical issues and their negative impact 
on his finances, Applicant consulted with an attorney and a financial counselor. Based 
on the information and guidance they furnished him, Applicant decided not to file for 
bankruptcy protection under Chapter 7. Instead, he took full responsibility for his debts, 
prioritized those debts, and set up a plan to resolve them. Based on his wife’s medical 
history, as well as the periodic health issues of his children, it is unclear if additional 
health issues will recur. Furthermore, while many of his delinquent accounts have not 
yet been resolved, they are in the process of being so. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.61 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s 
crippling and costly injuries caused by two rear-end collisions. She receives between 30 
and 60 injections each month as well as daily pain medication. As a direct result of 
those injuries, as well as her fibromyalgia, she is no longer able to work, reducing the 
two family incomes to one income. In addition, the medical and dental procedures for 
his children were unexpected and costly. The increasing medical expenses have had a 
“snowball effect,” and Applicant now spends about $9,000 to $10,000 per year on just 
                                                          
60
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
61
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
medical expenses. Applicant’s indebtedness was not caused by frivolous or 
irresponsible spending, and he did not spend beyond his means. Instead, his financial 
problems were largely beyond Applicant’s control. Under the circumstances, Applicant 
acted responsibly by addressing his delinquent accounts rather than avoiding them.62  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies. Applicant attempted to obtain a consolidation loan to enable 
him to address his delinquent debts but he did not qualify for one. He withdrew funds 
from his 401(k) retirement account in order to pay some bills. With the guidance 
received from the financial counselor, Applicant prioritized his accounts and contacted a 
variety of collection agents. While they generally demanded payments in amounts 
Applicant was unable to afford, some did enter into repayment plans with him. The 
result has been positive. Applicant has resolved several accounts, including some that 
are in the SOR and some that are not, and is in the process of resolving several others. 
Other accounts are in line. Under his repayment plan, while Applicant has been making 
some small payments to some creditors and larger ones to others, he intends to pay his 
creditors off one bill at a time.  
  
There is a substantial risk when one accepts, at face value, the contents of a 
credit report without obtaining original source documentation to verify entries. Credit 
bureaus collect information from a variety of sources, including public records and 
“other sources,” and it is these other unidentified sources that are the cause for 
concern. Likewise, when accounts are transferred, reassigned, sold, or merely churned, 
an individual’s credit history can look worse than it really is. In this particular instance, 
the 2012 credit report referred to several accounts multiple times, creating confusion as 
to what the actual status, balance, or creditor, of an account might be. Also, because of 
abbreviated names and acronyms, and the absence of full or, in some instances, even 
partial account numbers, many of those entries are garbled and redundant, and have 
inflated the financial concerns.  
Notwithstanding having met with a financial counselor, Applicant continues to 
possess a somewhat superficial understanding of financial procedures, credit reports, 
and his responsibilities in connection with the security clearance review process. He 
accepted the erroneous financial conclusions of the OPM investigator and the redundant 
financial allegations set forth in the SOR without questioning them or seeking validation 
from the various creditors or collection agents. Redundant accounts were listed in the 
SOR, but Applicant did not understand that fact. In order to display his good-faith efforts 
to resolve his debts, Applicant started paying debts to some creditors that had already 
been resolved with a different creditor name. 
  
                                                          
62
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), security concerns may be raised when there is a: 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant’s response to the inquiry in his 2010 SF 86 of critical information 
pertaining to the charge against him for aggravated battery on a pregnant woman – a 
charge that was eventually dismissed, sealed, and expunged – provides sufficient 
evidence to examine if his submission was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the 
SOR, or merely the result of misunderstanding or erroneous guidance he had previously 
received from his attorney at the time the charge was dismissed and the record was 
sealed and expunged, as he also contends. He denied the false response was 
deliberate or an attempt to falsify the material facts. While Applicant’s interpretation may 
be wrong, by reasonably relying on it, he clearly did not intend to falsify his response. 
His response may have been factually incorrect, but without any proof of deliberate 
concealment or falsification, in light of his denials and explanations, there is little to link 
his incorrect response to deliberate concealment of falsification. Considering Applicant’s 
reputation for being very honest and ethical, Applicant’s alleged conduct, under the 
evidence presented, would have constituted aberrant behavior on his part. Accordingly, 
while Applicant did not report the charge, I conclude his explanations are reasonable, 
and that he did not intentionally falsify his answer to this question. AG ¶ 16(a) has not 
been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
14 
                                      
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.63       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His handling of 
the family finances permitted a number of accounts to become delinquent. As a result, 
accounts were placed for collection or charged off. In 2003, Applicant was charged with 
aggravated battery on a pregnant woman. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant unsuccessfully attempted to obtain a consolidation loan; he successfully 
withdrew funds from his 401(k) retirement account; he met with an attorney and rejected 
the option of declaring bankruptcy under Chapter 7; he sought financial counseling; he 
contacted his creditors or collection agents; he prioritized his delinquent accounts; and 
he has resolved several accounts and is in the process of resolving several others. 
Under his repayment plan, Applicant intends to pay his creditors off one bill at a time. As 
for the criminal charge, the charge was dismissed and the records were sealed and 
expunged. He possesses an excellent reputation in the workplace and is a loving and 
engaged husband and father. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:64 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
                                                          
63
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
64
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
15 
                                      
 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction and 
elimination. Applicant has made some reasonable timely efforts to resolve his accounts. 
However, noting the extent of his remaining unresolved accounts, this decision should 
also serve as a warning that his failure to continue his debt resolution efforts or the 
accrual of new delinquent debts will adversely affect his future eligibility for a security 
clearance. As for his personal conduct, Applicant has been characterized as very 
honest and ethical. The criminal charge was dismissed, sealed, and expunged, and 
similar conduct has not been repeated. Overall, the evidence leaves me without 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations and personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) 
through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
 
16 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.q:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.s:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.v:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.w:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
