 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06320 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On June 13, 2012, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on June 27, 2011.2 On an unspecified date, DOHA issued him another 
set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on an unspecified date, which 
he subsequently signed on September 25, 2012.3 DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him on June 20, 2012, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
                                                          
1
 Government Exhibit 1 ((SF 86), dated September 22, 2010). 
 
2
 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 27, 2011). 
 
3
 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 25, 2012). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and detailed reasons 
why DOHA was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 26, 2012. In a sworn 
statement, dated July 10, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On August 13, 2012, Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to 
me on August 22, 2012. A Notice of Hearing was issued on September 5, 2012, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on September 25, 2012. 
 
 During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1 through 4) and eight 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through H) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and two other witnesses testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
October 2, 2012. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan), appearing in 
nine U.S. Government publications. Facts are proper for administrative notice when 
they are easily verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. 
In this instance, the Government relied on source information regarding Pakistan in 
publications of The White House,4 the U.S. Department of State,5 the Director of 
National Intelligence,6 and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.7  
                                                          
4
 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the 
Killing of Osama bin Laden, dated May 2, 2011. 
 
5
 U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 
2010, Terrorist Safe Havens, dated August 18, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, Country Reports: South and Central Asia Overview, dated August 18, 2011; U.S. Department of 
State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Pakistan, dated February 2, 2012; U.S. Department of State, 
Country Specific Information: Pakistan, dated October 31, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, 
Human Rights, and Labor, 2011 Human Rights Report: Pakistan, dated May 24, 2012. 
 
6
 Director of National Intelligence, Unclassified Statement for the Record on the Worldwide Threat 
Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the House Permanent Select Committee of Intelligence, dated 
February 2, 2012. 
 
7
 Statement of Admiral Michael Mullen, U.S. Navy, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, before the Senate Armed 
Services Committee on Afghanistan and Iraq, dated September 22, 2011; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
National Public Radio “All Things Considered” Interview, dated March 27, 2009. 
 
3 
                                      
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,8 as set 
forth below under the Pakistan subsection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the 
factual allegations pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since June 
2009, has served as a senior computer system analyst.9 He was previously employed 
by the same employer as a computer analyst from April 2002 until February 2005; and 
as a senior field engineer in Pakistan from February 2005 until June 2009. Applicant 
has never served in the U.S. military or in the military of any foreign country.10 He has 
never held a security clearance.11  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Pakistan,
12
 and they are both citizens and 
residents of a city that is a substantial distance from both the Federally Administered 
Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and Balochistan Province.
13
 Applicant’s father was, 
before his retirement, an employee of an international oil company, and his mother is a 
housewife.
14
 He has five brothers and one sister. One brother was born in Pakistan, and 
he remains a citizen and resident of Pakistan, where he is self-employed in a family 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18.  
 
10
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 21. 
 
11
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 48; Tr. at 47. 
 
12
 Under the Indian Independence Act of 1947, India was partitioned into two separate countries, India and 
Pakistan. As Applicant’s parents were both born before partition, they were actually born in India. 
 
13
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 27-28. 
 
14
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 12, 2010), at 1. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
export/import business.
15
 A second brother was born in Saudi Arabia, is a citizen and 
resident of Pakistan, but is currently being educated in Europe.
16
 A third brother was 
born in Pakistan, is a citizen and resident of Canada where he is employed by a hotel 
and restaurant.
17
 A fourth brother was born in Pakistan, but is a citizen and resident of 
Canada where he works for a mail delivery company.
18
 A fifth brother was born in 
Pakistan and is a citizen of Pakistan, but he is a permanent resident of the United 
States where he is self-employed in the export/import business.
19
 Applicant’s sister was 
born in Saudi Arabia, is a citizen and resident of Pakistan, and is currently being 
educated in Europe.
20
 She is in the final stages of obtaining immigration status for 
Canada, and intends to relocate there as soon as her application is approved.
21
 
Applicant’s parents and his siblings have never had any connection with the Pakistani 
Government, the military, or the intelligence service. 
 
The frequency of Applicant’s contacts with his parents and siblings is varied. He 
speaks with his parents by telephone once every two weeks; with his sister, twice a 
month; with his brothers in Canada, two to three times per week; with his brothers in 
Pakistan, once every two to three months; and with his brother in the United States, 
once per month, as well as in person. Applicant last saw his family in Pakistan in 2010 
when he attended the wedding of one of his brothers. 
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan.22 He left Pakistan at the age of two when his 
family moved to Saudi Arabia in connection with his father’s employment. He left Saudi 
Arabia in 1988, and attended an American boarding school in Switzerland until mid-
1993.23 Applicant immigrated to the United States in mid-1993 to attend a U.S. 
university. He eventually obtained a Bachelor of Science degree in information 
technology in 2005 from one university and a master’s degree in information systems 
management in 2007 from another university.24 He is currently enrolled in another 
graduate program. 
 
                                                          
15
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 1; GE 1, supra note 1, at 30. 
 
16
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 2; GE 1, supra note 1, at 33. 
 
17
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 2; GE 1, supra note 1, at 32; GE 2, supra note 2 
(Letter, dated June 27, 2011). 
 
18
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 2; GE 1, supra note 1, at 30-31. 
 
19
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 3; GE 1, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
20
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 1; GE 1, supra note 1, at 33-34. 
 
21
 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, dated July 10, 2012, at 2. 
 
22
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
23
 Tr. at 43-44; AE D (Diploma, dated June 19, 1991). 
 
24
 Tr. at 44-46; AE E (Degree, dated April 30, 2005); AE F (Degree, dated October 31, 2007). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Applicant was married the first time in 1997, and divorced in 2003. He married 
his current wife in 2003, and they have two children, born in the United States in 2004 
and 2008.
25
 Applicant’s current wife was born in Kuwait, and she became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen.
26
 The family resides in the United States with her parents. Applicant’s 
father-in-law and mother-in-law were born in Pakistan. His father-in-law is a citizen and 
resident of the United States. His mother-in-law remains a citizen of Pakistan, and 
permanent resident of the United States.
27
 His father-in-law is unemployed and his 
mother-in-law is a nurse. Neither of his in-laws has ever had any connection with the 
Pakistani Government, the military, or the intelligence service. 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2009. Between July 2009 and 
September 2010, he maintained dual citizenship, but on September 21, 2010, he 
destroyed his previously issued Pakistani passport and essentially renounced his 
Pakistani citizenship.28 He formally renounced his Pakistani citizenship earlier this 
year.29 Applicant stated: “I am, first and foremost, an American Citizen and took an oath 
to uphold the laws of the United States and to protect this country.” Applicant has no 
financial interests in Pakistan. 
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia. It is a low-income 
country, with a population that is 97 percent Muslim. It has a coalition government. 
Pakistan was one of only three countries to recognize the Taliban regime of 
Afghanistan, after September 11, 2001. However, Pakistan reassessed its relations with 
the Taliban and pledged support to the United States and the international coalition in 
Operation Enduring Freedom, which aimed at removing the Taliban from power. 
Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the FATA of Pakistan 
and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The Taliban 
operates openly in Pakistan, as do extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and al-Qaida. 
Taliban financing has been traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the 
insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan 
has intensified its counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has 
been mixed. 
  
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. Those safe havens have been defined as:30 
                                                          
25
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 24-26, 28-29. 
 
26
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 24-25. 
 
27
 GE 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 3; GE 1, supra note 1, at 34-35; GE 2, supra note 17 
(Letter). 
 
28
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 8-10. 
 
29
 Atch. to Applicant’s Response to the SOR. 
 
30
 U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 
2010, Terrorist Safe Havens, supra note 5, at 1 
 
6 
                                      
 
ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed areas of a country and non-
physical areas where terrorist groups that constitute a threat to U.S. 
national security interests are able to organize, plan, raise funds, 
communicate, recruit, train, and operate in relative security because of 
inadequate goverance capacity, political will, or both. 
 
 The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in part by 
insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous Afghan-
Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to al-Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. al-
Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan insurgency, 
while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests in Pakistan 
and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists groups, al-Qaida 
uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare regional and 
transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and supplies. al-
Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide attacks 
throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel. In January 2011, the Governor of Punjab was 
assassinated in a terrorist attack, and in March 2011, the Pakistani Federal Minister for 
Minority Affairs was assassinated in another terrorist attack. 
 
Pakistan consistently ranks among the most corrupt countries in the world by 
numerous international organizations. The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of 
the risks of traveling to Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several 
American citizens present in Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other 
personal reasons. The human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial 
killings, torture, and disappearances occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police 
corruption is widespread, and the Pakistani government maintains several domestic 
intelligence agencies to monitor politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the 
media, and suspected foreign intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that 
authorities use wiretaps and monitor mail without the requisite court approval, and also 
monitor phones and electronic messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its 
own nuclear infrastructure, expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more 
advanced warhead and delivery systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of 
nuclear weapons, the United States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
 
7 
                                      
 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005. 
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel raided a large compound 
located in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan and shot and killed Osama bin Laden, 
the leader of al-Qaida.  
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Applicant’s overall performance assessments have generally characterized him 
as a successful contributor, high contributor, or exceptional contributor – the three top 
ratings among the five possible ratings. He is mission-oriented rather than task-oriented, 
and consistently exceeds objectives and expectations. He works effectively with 
others.31 A former supervisor, who was also a former senior U.S. intelligence officer, 
and is now the president of another defense contractor, has described Applicant in very 
favorable terms. Applicant has a “track record of technical expertise, demonstrated 
leadership and unimpeachable integrity.”32 Another colleague mentioned Applicant’s 
“high personal integrity” as well as his trustworthiness. During Applicant’s assignment to 
Pakistan as part of the global war on terrorism, in support of U.S. efforts in Pakistan, 
Applicant performed his duties with “integrity, hard work and creative thinking under 
sometimes difficult circumstances.”33 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”34 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”35   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
31
 AE A (Performance Assessment and Development Review, dated December 16, 2011); AE B 
(Performance Assessment and Development Review, dated December 13, 2008); AE C (Performance Assessment 
and Development Review, dated March 18, 2005). 
 
32
 Character Reference, undated, attached to Applicant’s Response to the SOR. 
 
33
 AE H (Character Reference, dated January 22, 2007). 
 
34
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
35
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”36 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.37  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”38 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”39 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
                                                          
36
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
37
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
38
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
39
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.40 Applicant’s relationships with his parents and 
siblings who remain Pakistani citizens and residents are current security concerns for 
the Government. The security significance of his continuing relationships with those 
family members and extended family members who are citizens, but not residents of 
Pakistan, especially those residing in the United States and Canada, has been 
substantially minimized. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. 
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his parents and siblings who are 
                                                          
40
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
10 
                                      
 
Pakistani citizen-residents, to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential 
conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or communication with foreign citizens 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.41 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”42 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
                                                          
41
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
42
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
11 
                                      
 
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in 
Afghanistan, forcing the Taliban out of power. Nevertheless, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within both Afghanistan and Pakistan. It is less likely that 
the Pakistan government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive information. 
The real concern in this instance is not the Pakistan government, but rather al-Qaida or 
other terrorist organizations operating within Pakistan.  
 
There is little security concern regarding Applicant’s two brothers who are 
citizens and residents of Canada; the brother who is a citizen of Pakistan, but a 
permanent resident of the United States; Applicant’s sister who is currently a citizen of 
Pakistan, awaiting relocation to Canada; as well as his mother-in-law who is a citizen of 
Pakistan, but a permanent resident of the United States. Under those circumstances, as 
to them, there is no continuing substantial risk of any kind of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a 
security clearance.  
 
However, as to the remaining family members – Applicant’s parents and one 
brother are citizens and residents of Pakistan; and one brother is a citizen and resident 
of Pakistan, but is currently being educated in Europe – there are potential security 
issues. Although Applicant’s parents and siblings reside in a city that is a substantial 
distance from both the FATA of Pakistan and Balochistan Province, there is substantial 
risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, 
or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security clearance. There is no 
evidence that Applicant’s parents or siblings are, or ever have been, political activists, 
challenging the policies of the Pakistan government; that terrorists have approached or 
threatened Applicant or his parents or siblings any reason; that the Pakistan 
government, al-Qaida, or other terrorist organizations have approached Applicant; or 
that his parents or siblings currently engage in activities that would bring attention to 
himself. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would be targets for coercion or 
exploitation by the Pakistan government, al-Qaida, or other terrorists, which may seek 
to quiet those who speak out against them. 
 
Applicant relocated with his family from Pakistan to Saudi Arabia when he was 
two years old. In 1988, his exposure to American ideals commenced when he enrolled 
in an American boarding school in Switzerland. He has significant connections to the 
United States, having resided in the United States since mid-1993; completing two 
university degrees in the United States; being married here; having two children here; 
and working here. He formally renounced his Pakistani citizenship. With the exception 
of his few family members still residing in Pakistan, Applicant’s immediate and extended 
family members all reside either in the United States or Canada. Moreover, he wants his 
security clearance so that he can return to Pakistan and assist U.S. Armed Forces and 
the U.S. Department of State. He has offered to continue to risk his life to support the 
United States’ goals in Pakistan, and has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to 
the United States. Applicant’s continuing relationship with his parents and siblings is 
close and his contacts with them are frequent, too close and frequent to generate more 
 
12 
                                      
 
than a limited application of AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). However, I am persuaded that his 
loyalty to the United States is steadfast and undivided, and that he has “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [he] can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.43       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because his 
parents and one brother are citizens and residents of Pakistan; and one brother is a 
citizen and resident of Pakistan, but is currently being educated in Europe.  Although 
they reside in a city that is a substantial distance from both the FATA of Pakistan and 
Balochistan Province, there is substantial risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion from the Pakistan 
government, al-Qaida, or other terrorist organizations.  (See AG & 2(a)(8).)   
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has offered to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in 
Pakistan, and has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. He is 
fully aware of the risks to himself and family members from al-Qaida and other terrorists. 
These circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or 
exploit him.44 With the vast majority of his family and extended family members residing 
in the United States or Canada, there is a reduced “heightened risk” of foreign 
                                                          
43
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
44
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
13 
                                      
 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Under the evidence 
presented, I have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
