 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 11-09047                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Peter Ross, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 27, 2010. On August 3, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 24, 2012, DOHA received Applicant’s notarized answer to the SOR. 
He elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to 
me on September 7, 2012. I convened a hearing on October 10, 2012, to consider 
 
2 
 
 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced five 
exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 5 and entered in the record without 
objection. Applicant testified and called one witness. He introduced ten exhibits, which 
were marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through J and entered in the record without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 18, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.) In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted three allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.g.). 
He denied four SOR allegations at ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. Applicant’s admissions are 
entered as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old, divorced, and the father of a six-year-old child. 
Applicant and his wife share joint legal and residential custody of their child. For the last 
four years, Applicant has been employed as a senior machinist by a government 
contractor. He is a high school graduate. In the past, he has worked as a carpenter. He 
is also a certified locksmith. He seeks a security clearance for the first time.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 
38-39, 91.) 
 
 In 2003 or 2004, Applicant was working as a carpenter. He punched a wall and 
broke his right hand. He was unable to work for three months. At the time, he had no 
medical insurance and was not eligible for unemployment benefits, since the injury was 
not work-related. Applicant was again unemployed for three months in 2006. Other than 
these two periods of unemployment, Applicant has been steadily employed for the past 
nine years. (Ex. 1; Ex. 3; Tr. 72-75.)  
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $24,802. 
Applicant acknowledged that a $240 debt to a communications provider, alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.a., remained unsatisfied. He stated that he had disputed the debt; however, he 
failed to provide documentation to corroborate the dispute. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 56-57, 
85.) 
 
 Applicant also acknowledged that an $11,914 delinquent debt, alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.b., remained unsatisfied. He stated that the debt arose in 2003, when his truck was 
repossessed. Originally, the debt totaled approximately $3,000. Applicant speculated 
that the debt increased over nine years when finance charges and late fees were added 
to the original debt. He has not contacted the creditor to make a payment arrangement 
or to settle the account. (Tr. 41-43, 59-60.)  
 
 Applicant provided documentation establishing that in November 2010 he had 
satisfied a $1,201 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. He also provided documentation that a 
$3,938 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. had been subject to litigation and had been 
dismissed. Additionally, Applicant provided documentation establishing that he had a 
 
3 
 
 
payment plan in place to satisfy the $4,674 delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶1.e. 
Applicant demonstrated that he owed a balance on the debt of $1,600 and was making 
monthly payments of $100. He also claimed he had satisfied the $335 delinquent debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. but had lost documentation showing the debt had been satisfied. 
(Answer to SOR; Ex. C; Ex. B; Ex. A; Ex. J; Tr. 60-61, 86-88.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he owed the delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. The 
debt is listed on the SOR as totaling $2,500. Applicant acknowledged the debt was 
unpaid, was over seven years old, and had increased to $4,849. (Answer to SOR; Ex. I; 
Tr. 69-70.)  
 
  Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) in October 2010. At that time, he acknowledged several 
delinquent debts and stated that he lived day-to-day and did not make enough money to 
pay his delinquent debts. At his hearing, he stated that he intends to pay all of his 
existing financial delinquencies systematically over time. (Ex. 3; Tr. 53-55.)  
 
 In September 2011, Applicant purchased a home. The purchase price was 
$257,000. Applicant put no money down and financed 100% of the purchase price. (Tr. 
81.) 
  
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement dated July 5, 2012. He 
reported a monthly net income of $3,309. His fixed monthly living expenses total 
$1,370. His monthly debt payments include the following: mortgage: $1,434; two credit 
card payments: $100; automobile payment: $435; and payment of the debt identified at 
SOR ¶ 1.e.: $100. Applicant’s total debt and monthly living expenses total $3,439, 
indicating that each month Applicant spends approximately $129 more than he earns. 
(Ex. 2.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant reported that he received $162 a month in child support, 
and that amount was not reflected on his personal financial statement. He noted that 
this amount offset the negative monthly remainder on his financial statement. (Tr. 77-
81.) 
 
 Applicant reported he had $200 in his checking account, $100 in his savings 
account, and approximately $18,000 in his 401(k) account. The record does not reflect 
that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. (Tr. 82-83.) 
  
 Applicant’s supervisor for the past four years appeared as a witness. He praised 
Applicant’s work ethic, and he stated that Applicant is well-respected in the workplace. 
He noted that Applicant was reliable and paid his current financial obligations. 
Applicant’s recent performance evaluations were received into evidence. They showed 
that his job knowledge, analytical, and problem-solving skills were consistently rated as 
excellent. (Ex. F; Ex. G; Ex. H; Tr. 98-106.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Since 2003, Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and 
was unable or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
 
6 
 
 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant was unemployed for three months in 2003 and 2004. He was again 
unemployed for three months in 2006. He failed to establish that his inability to satisfy 
his delinquent debts resulted from unemployment conditions over which he had no 
control. He has been steadily employed for the last four years. Even so, Applicant 
admitted a history of financial difficulties and inattention to his financial responsibilities. 
To his credit, he provided documentation establishing that he had paid one debt and 
had a payment plan in effect for a second debt. Additionally, he claimed to have 
satisfied a third debt, but failed to provide documentation to corroborate payment. A 
fourth debt was resolved by judicial action.   
 
 Two of Applicant’s three remaining delinquent debts date back at least seven 
years, and those three delinquencies currently total approximately $17,000. Applicant 
failed to provide documentation showing that he had a plan to resolve these debts in 
light of his limited resources. His personal financial statement and his testimony suggest 
he allocates nearly all of his monthly income to current expenses and debts and has 
little money left over to pay his long-term financial delinquencies or to address 
unforeseen financial emergencies.  
 
 According to Applicant’s personal financial statement, he spends $129 more than 
he earns each month. At his hearing, he noted that in addition to the income listed on 
his financial report, he receives $162 each month in child support. He observed that the 
child support offset the monthly deficit reported on his personal financial report. When 
the monthly child support payments are added to Applicant’s income, he reports a net 
remainder each month of $33. These facts suggest that Applicant’s financial situation 
could become unstable if unexpected financial emergencies should occur.  
 
 The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. 
Applicant’s current financial situation raises security concerns about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant stated he planned to pay the delinquent debts identified 
at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.g. at some time in the future. In determining an individual's 
security worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant 
might resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 
at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999).  
 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve one of his debts (SOR ¶ 1.c.), 
and he has an active payment plan in place to resolve another (SOR ¶ 1.e.) I conclude 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part to his case. However, Applicant’s unresolved financial 
delinquencies total over $17,000, and he does not appear to have the financial 
resources to resolve those debts and meet his monthly living expenses. After carefully 
 
7 
 
 
weighing the facts of Applicant’s case, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(e) not apply in mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 32 
years. His supervisor testified that he is hard-working and well-respected in the 
workplace. His performance reviews revealed that his job knowledge, analytical, and 
problem-solving skills were excellent. His financial problems began several years ago 
and are ongoing. Despite a steady income for at least four years, he has failed to 
budget his income to satisfy two substantial debts, which have increased in size 
because he has failed to address them. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                   Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c. - 1.e.: For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f. - 1.g.: Against Applicant 
   
                                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
