 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06598 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 31, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In August 2005 
Applicant pled guilty to three counts of Indecent Assault and Battery on a Child Under 
14. As a result of the guilty plea, he was placed on probation for ten years and required 
to register as a sex offender. His criminal conviction and sexual conduct raises security 
concerns under Guidelines D and J, which are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
D, Sexual Behavior; and J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 
2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 1, 2012, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on September 19, 2012. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on September 25, 2012. He was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant responded on October 22, 2012, with 
exhibits marked and admitted as Items A through G. The case was assigned to me on 
October 29, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, and 2.a. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked in 
the same contracting position since April 2002. He held a security clearance while in 
that position from 2002 through 2009. Applicant served in the Air Force from 1981 to 
2001. He achieved the rank of Technical Sergeant (E6). He is divorced and has three 
children. (Item 5; Item 8; Item C.) 
 
As stated in the SOR, Applicant was charged in or around August of 2005 with 
three counts of Indecent Assault and Battery on a Child Under 14. He pled guilty and 
was sentenced to ten years of probation. (Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by an authorized agent of the Office of Personnel 
Management on August 10, 2006, regarding his arrest and conviction. The report of 
investigation disclosed: 
 
In 12/2004, while the subject and his family were in family counseling . . . 
the subject was told by his wife and Dr. [family counselor’s omitted] that he 
needed to move out of the house immediately and that he was being 
accused of improperly touching his 14 year old daughter [name omitted] 
on 3 occasions in 04/2004. The subject was not involved in any violent 
act. The subject and his family had been seeing Dr. [family counselor’s 
omitted] for family counseling because the subjects daughter [name 
omitted] kept running away from home. The subject and his family had 
seen Dr. [family counselor’s omitted] a total of 2 or 3 visits. After leaving 
the marital residence the subject voluntarily sought counseling with Dr. 
[second physician’s name omitted] for his problem. From 12/2004 to 
present he has seen Dr. [second physician’s name omitted] once every 
three weeks. In 08/2005 he was formally charged with indecent assault 
and battery and appeared in [omitted] county court to answer to the 
charges. The subject pled guilty to all charges. During court he was 
recommended to be recorded as a level 2 sex offender. He was ordered to 
ten years  probation, register in the county where he lives as a level 2 sex 
offender, and cannot leave the state of [omitted] without his probation 
officers approval. (Item 7.) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant described this offense on his February 2011 security clearance 
application, indicating: 
 
Offense: Indecent assault and battery. I inappropriately touched my 
daughter. I do not want to give out specific details of the incident because 
people from outside of work have approached me about the incident when 
they would have no way of knowing what happened if it had not been for 
the investigative report and me losing my security clearance.  
 
Action taken: 10 yr probation. I sought out counseling on my own when 
the offense occurred. The state mandated that I attend counseling 
directed at such offenses. I started counseling in June 2005 and have 
been going weekly ever since. (Item 5.) 
 
Applicant “was unwilling to provide further details regarding the incident,” during his 
personal subject interview on March 2, 2011. (Item 6.)  
 
Police reports filed in this case indicate that Applicant inappropriately fondled 
both of his daughters. (Item 9.) Applicant’s probation is scheduled to expire in August 
2015. He is not permitted to have any unsupervised contact with children under the age 
of 16. (Item 8.) 
 
Applicant indicated he sought out counseling in May 2005 and successfully 
completed a treatment program in 2007. Applicant presented a letter from a licensed 
clinical social worker as evidence that he continues to participate in a monthly aftercare 
program. (Item B.) Applicant contends that he is in full compliance with all requirements 
set out by the court and cannot be coerced or blackmailed with the information 
regarding his offense. He voluntarily disclosed his criminal offense to his current 
supervisors. His supervisor indicated that he is aware of Applicant’s legal issues, but 
that he would recommend Applicant for a position of trust based upon his performance 
the past six years. (Item B.) 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the Air Force for 20 years. During his service, he 
was awarded two Air Force Achievement Medals, three Air Force Commendation 
Medals, and was the Noncommissioned Officer of the Year. During his civilian career, 
Applicant has been recognized with a number of professional awards. His performance 
evaluations reflect he excels in his job. (Item D; Item E; Item G.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
 
5 
 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
Applicant has clearly engaged in sexual behavior that was criminal and causes 
him to potentially be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. He inappropriately 
touched his two minor daughters. His decisions to engage in these acts reflect that 
Applicant has poor judgment and lacks discretion. The above disqualifying conditions 
have been established.  
 
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s conduct occurred in or 
prior to 2004, but he is still on probation for this offense. It was not an isolated incident, 
but occurred over time, to both of his daughters. Further, he has not been sufficiently 
forthcoming with the details of his offense with the investigators and on his security 
clearance application to allow for a reasoned decision concerning his security eligibility. 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant was convicted of three counts of Indecent Assault and Battery on a 
Child Under 14. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s most recent criminal activity occurred in 2004. While Applicant has 
received counseling since 2005, not enough time has passed to determine if Applicant 
has successfully been rehabilitated because he is still on probation and under the 
jurisdiction of the court. His impressive record of service in the Air Force and in his 
civilian position does not mitigate his criminal acts, which took place outside of the 
workplace. Further, his inability to be forthcoming with all of the details surrounding his 
convictions indicates he still demonstrates questionable judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
32(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his supervisor. He has served the U.S. honorably 
for 20 years with the Air Force and has been in his current position since 2002. 
However, his judgment in choosing to touch his daughters inappropriately reflects a lack 
of judgment and was a criminal activity. He has not fully completed his probation. 
Further, his unwillingness to discuss the criminal allegations in detail indicates that he 
may be subject to coercion over the incidents.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the Sexual Behavior and Criminal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
