1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-02080 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 3, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 4, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2012, and his answer was received by 
DOHA on May 2, 2012. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 14, 
2012. The case was assigned to me on June 26, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on July 2, 2012, scheduling the hearing for July 25, 2012. The hearing was held 
as scheduled. 
2 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were received without objection. The Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were received without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 2, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all ten SOR allegations involving delinquent debts. (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. – 1.j.) and denied all seven SOR allegations pertaining to falsifications (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. 
– 2.g.). (SOR answer, Tr. 13-14.) His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old personal computer installer, who has been employed 
by a defense contractor since June 2010. He seeks a secret security clearance which is 
a condition of his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 16-17.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 2001. He has completed 
approximately 54 college credit hours towards his associate degree, and has been 
awarded several technical certificates related to his current job. Applicant has never 
married, but lives with a woman who is the mother of their one-year-old child. His 
significant other has an eight-year-old child from a previous relationship who lives with 
them. (Tr. 16, 19.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges ten debts totalling $32,415. Three of those debts are 
student loans and constitute the majority of his indebtedness. He did not attempt to 
address any of the alleged debts until recently, approximately three months before his 
hearing. Applicant recently consolidated his three student loans and made several $60 
monthly payments on those loans, but stopped making payments hoping to secure “a 
better option for a payment plan.” He also began making modest payments on three of 
his smaller debts shortly before his hearing and disputed the remaining debts. Applicant 
did not submit evidence of any ongoing good-faith effort to repay his creditors or reach a 
final resolution of any of his non-student loan smaller debts. In short, it became clear 
after the hearing commenced that Applicant had done little if anything to make any 
significant headway in addressing his indebtedness. (Tr. 21-35, GE 1, AE A-F.)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When completing his November 2010 e-QIP, Applicant provided incorrect 
answers in response to seven questions. Those are: (1) he failed to disclose a written 
warning he received from a previous employer and that he had been terminated by a 
previous employer when asked about previous employment; (2) he failed to disclose 
any of his SOR debts when asked whether he had defaulted on any type of loan; (3) he 
failed to disclose any of his SOR debts when asked whether he had any bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency; (4) he failed to disclose any of his SOR debts when 
3 
 
asked whether he had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled 
for failing to pay as agreed; (5) he failed to disclose any of his SOR debts when asked 
whether he had been over 180 days delinquent on any debts; (6) he failed to disclose 
any of his SOR debts when asked whether he was currently over 90 days delinquent on 
any debts; and (7) he failed to disclose any of his SOR debts when asked whether he 
was currently delinquent on any Federal debt. 
 
 Applicant stated his failure to provide accurate information was “not deliberate.” 
He added, “At that time I had a lot of pressure. I was working. I was out of state in [a 
U.S. city] working nights. I was in a hurry doing the application a couple of times and the 
computer would give me problems.” (Tr. 14.) When queried by Department Counsel, 
Applicant remained consistent with this explanation. It is clear that Applicant provided 
incorrect information and concluded, “If I would do this application now, I would be more 
careful in what I said no to or yes.” (Tr. 36-42.) 
 
 Also, when queried by Department Counsel about his income taxes, Applicant 
acknowledged that he did not file 2009 and 2010 federal income tax returns. (Tr. 43-45.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
4 
 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  Under Guideline F, the concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18.) 
 
 Applicant accumulated ten debts totaling $32,415. Shortly before his hearing, he 
made a modest effort to address his debts. As noted, none of his SOR debts have been 
resolved insofar as being paid, settled, or successfully disputed with supporting 
documentation of same. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant does not receive credit under this mitigating 
condition. He did not offer evidence of any condition beyond his control that led to his 
financial problems. Furthermore, to receive full credit under this mitigating condition, 
Applicant has to demonstrate that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. There 
is no evidence that Applicant remained in contact with his creditors or tried to make 
minimum payments until recently.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek financial counseling. 
Likewise, there is not sufficient evidence in the record to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant offered little or no evidence that he had made or is making a 
                                                          
1
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner 
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he 
maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts 
current. 
 
2
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
6 
 
good-faith effort to repay his creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. Applicant receives 
some credit for attempting to make modest payments on several of his debts; however, 
these efforts fall into the category of “too little too late.” His individual and collective 
efforts are not indicative of a “good-faith” effort to repay his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
applicable. Although Applicant claims to have disputed several SOR debts, he did not 
produce documentation supporting the basis of his disputes or documentation indicating 
that his disputes were successful. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the concern is that conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15.) 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, ….  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his November 2010 e-QIP seven times 
by failing to provide full, complete, or truthful answers. Applicant’s explanation that his 
failure to provide such information was “not deliberate,” that he was under a “lot of 
pressure,” or that he was “in a hurry,” or that “the computer would give me problems” is 
simply not credible. His debts and past employment problems were significant enough 
for him to remember them when completing an e-QIP.  His explanations are insufficient 
to overcome his obligation to tell the complete truth during the security clearance vetting 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option in order to 
claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
process. The Government established through the evidence presented the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e). 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately -- knowingly and willfully. An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. Here, Applicant knew of his past 
employment and financial problems and chose not to disclose them. Had Applicant’s 
information been relied upon without verification, he may well have successfully vetted 
for a security clearance. Regardless of the reason Applicant chose not to be 
forthcoming, the process does not allow for applicants to pick and choose which 
answers they will answer truthfully. When applicants lie on their security clearance 
applications, they seriously undermine the process, as Applicant did in this case. I find 
that none of the mitigating conditions fully apply.3  
                                                          
3
 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant’s financial indebtedness is ongoing and his 
limited efforts to address his indebtedness are insufficient to overcome the security 
concerns raised. His deliberate failure to disclose information on his security clearance 
application is serious, recent, and not mitigated. As such, I have concerns about his 
current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole-person concept, I conclude he has not mitigated security concerns 
pertaining to financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.g.:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
