 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          1 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02373 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has two unresolved debts the result of vehicle repossessions, which 
total more than $31,000. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 11, 2012, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial consideations. 
  
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          2 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
 On May 29, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
July 30, 2012, I was assigned the case. On September 4, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on September 19, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information. On September 27, 2012, additional material 
was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was 
admitted into the record as Ex. F. On September 25, 2012, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b 
and ¶ 1.d. He admitted the remaining factual allegations. I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions to the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old production manager who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2009. From December 1998 to June 2002, he served in the U.S. 
Marine Corps, separating as an E-4. From June 2002 through November 2002, he was 
unemployed. (Tr. 26) In July 2003, he obtained a job with a defense contractor making 
$13 per hour. (Tr. 34) He was making $18 per hour when he went to a new company. 
(Tr. 34) In June 2009, the federal contract was not renewed and awarded to his current 
employer. In June 2009, his employment transferred directly from his prior employer to 
his current employer. (Ex. 4) In November 2011, his company moved him to casual 
status (unemployment) because he did not have a clearance. (Tr. 28) He was making 
$30.50 per hour when moved to casual status. (Tr. 33) Since November 2011, he has 
been receiving unemployment compensation of $852 every two weeks. (Tr. 36)  
 
Applicant called no witnesses other than himself. He submitted character letters 
from coworkers and friends stating he is a hardworking, upright individual, a 
consummate professional, honest, loyal, dependable, reliable, and a man of integrity, 
with a strong moral code. His work ethic is outstanding. (Ex. A1- A9) His duty 
performance has also been outstanding and he has received promotions at work. (Ex. 
C)  
 
In 2008, Applicant’s spouse lost her job as an office manager. Her job had paid 
$80,000 annually. (Tr. 25) Applicant was unable to pay the bills when the family income 
was reduced. (Ex. 3) After five or six months, she obtained a job as an administrative 
assistant making $21 per hour, approximately half her previous salary. (Ex. 25, Tr. 35) 
In 2010, she was unemployed for two or three months. Applicant and his wife have two 
children ages 12 and 14. A nephew, age 14, also lives with them. (Tr. 28)  
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          3 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
The SOR contains three unpaid medical bills ($215, $364, and $285). Appliant 
had hurt his back twice and one was for his wife’s hospital visit. (Tr. 29) The three debts 
were being collected by the same collection agency.(Tr. 29) Applicant paid $200 on this 
debt on July 2, 2012; July 16, 2012; and August 22, 2012. On September 2012, he 
made his final payment of $222. (Ex. E, F) 
 
In 2007, Applicant purchased two new 2007 Ford F-150 pickup trucks. (Tr. 43) 
One vehicle loan had a high credit of $34,050 with $751 monthly payments. (Ex. 5, 6) In 
November 2008, he had gotten behind on the payments for one of the trucks and 
returned it. He thought the vehicle was worth approximately $15,000 when it was 
voluntarily repossessed. (Ex. 3) In February 2009, the creditor charged off $20,646 on 
the debt. (Ex. 6) His November 2011 credit bureau report (CBR) lists the balance due 
as $23,534. (Ex. 5) He still has the other 2007 truck and is current on the $600 monthly 
payments. (Tr. 43, 44) 
 
In May 2008, Applicant purchased a 2008 Ford Fusion, and his vehicle loan had 
$550 monthly payments. (Tr. 42) The high credit was listed on his November 2011 CBR 
as $8,118. (Ex. 5) He got behind on the payments and in September 2010, the vehicle 
was voluntarily repossessed. (Ex. 3) In October 2011, the creditor charged off $7,795 
on this loan. (Ex. 3)  
 
As of December 2011, when interviewed by Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) agent, Applicant had yet to contact these two lenders to attempt settlement of 
these debts. (Ex. 3) At the hearing, he had still not contacted either debtor on the 
vehicles because he had no funds to offer them. (Tr. 31, 32, 39) Earlier, the debtor on 
the truck debt had offered to settle for a lump-sum amount, which Applicant was unable 
to pay. (Tr. 39) Neither creditor is currently contacting him demanding payment.  
 
Applicant maintains a budget. (Tr. 38) He is current on the $300 monthly 
payments on his wife’s 2007 Ford 500. (Tr. 44, 45) He is current on his rent and 
receiving no calls from creditors. (Tr. 45) He has not had any formal financial 
counseling, but has listened to financial-talk shows on the radio. (Tr. 48)  
 
A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a 
b 
c 
Three unpaid medical 
accounts: $215, $364, 
and $285.  
$864 Paid. Between July 2012 and 
September 2012, Applicant made four 
payments paying $822 paying these 
debts. (Ex. E, F)  
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          4 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
d Collection account for a 
service cancelled during 
the free-trial period. (Ex. 
3)  
$116 Paid. In April 2012, the creditor offered 
to settle for $52.43. In May 2012, 
Applicant paid the full amount of the 
debt. (Ex. D, E, Tr. 30) 
e A charged-off account for 
a vehicle repossessed in 
November 2008.  
$23,886 Unpaid. 
f A charged-off account for 
a vehicle repossessed in 
September 2009.  
$7,795 Unpaid 
 Total debt listed in SOR $32,661  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          5 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has two unresolved debts resulting from vehicle repossessions. These 
two unresolved obligations total in excess of $31,000. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          6 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
 
 The following six Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors as to the two debts, resulting from 
the vehicle repossessions. The debts went delinquent during periods of unemployment. 
However, he did not act responsibly under the circumstances, as he has not maintained 
contact with his creditors. Also, unemployment is not such a unique circumstance that it 
will not recur. Currently, Applicant is unemployed. The two unresolved debts cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
In 2002, Applicant was unemployed for six months after leaving the Marine 
Corps. In November 2011, his hourly wage was $30.50 when his company moved him 
to casual status (unemployment) due to a lack of a clearance. From 2003 to November 
2011, he had been continuously employed. He now receives unemployment 
compensation and payment on the repossessions is unlikely. (Tr. 36) In 2008, 
Applicant’s spouse’s job as an office manager ended and she was unemployed for five 
or six months before obtaining employment, which paid approximately half as much as 
her previous job. In 2010, she was unemployed for two or three months.  
 
In 2007, Applicant purchased two new 2007 Ford F-150 pickup trucks. Both he 
and his wife were gainfully employed when the trucks were purchased. In November 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          7 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
2008, during the period of his wife’s unemployment, he voluntarily surrendered one of 
the trucks. In May 2008, Applicant purchased a 2008 Ford Fusion. In September 2010, 
following another period when his wife was unemployed, he voluntarily surrendered the 
vehicle. He has not contacted the creditors because he has no money to offer them.  
 
Even though there are only two unresolved debts, I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply because the two unresolved obligations total in excess of $31,000.  
 
Applicant’s unemployment in 2002 is too distant in time to have an impact on his 
current finances. His wife’s 2008 and 2010 unemployment are circumstances beyond 
his control. However, for AG ¶ 20(b) to apply Applicant must show he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Following the 2008 repossession of the pickup truck, 
Applicant did not contact the creditor to establish a repayment plan even after his wife 
returned to work. Following the 2010 repossession, he did not contact either creditor as 
to the repossessed vehicles even though both he and his wife were working during 
2010 and most of 2011.2 He failed to act responsibly by not contacting the creditors 
when he and his wife were both working.  
 
Applicant has listened to financial–talk shows on the radio, but has received no 
formal financial counseling. The two debts remain unpaid. AG & 20(c) does not apply. 
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has paid a $116 debt (SOR 1.d) and paid $822 to 
resolve three medical accounts (SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c). AG & 20(d) applies to these 
now paid debts. AG & 20(e) does not apply because Applicant is not disputing the debts 
resulting from the two repossessions, only the amount owed. AG & 20(f) does not apply 
because affluence is not the issue.  
 
Since being questioned about his unresolved debts in November 2011, Applicant 
has paid less than $1,000 on his delinquent accounts. He has more than $31,000 in 
unresolved debt. He has not demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, 
or that he has a plan to bring them under control. With his limited income, the two debts 
are likely to remain unresolved. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
2
 Applicant’s wife was unemployed for two or three months in 2010. He was unemployed after November 
2011. 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          8 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s letters of character 
indicate he is a good and upstanding person, and a hard worker with outstanding duty 
performance. He has addressed four small debts, but two large debts remain 
unresolved and are likely to remain so in the future. The issue is not simply whether all 
his debts are paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2 (a)(1).)  
 
Applicant’s wife went through two periods of unemployment. However, once she 
had secured a new job, there was a period of inaction during which nothing was done to 
address the two delinquent debts arising from the repossessions.  
 
While the periods of unemployment and reduced earnings by Applicant’s spouse 
were factors beyond his control, he took no action to contact the two creditors or to 
arrange payment plans when they were both again employed full time. This raises 
concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. Should he be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in 
the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance with a 
repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the two obligations, he may well demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not 
warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Consideations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f: Against Applicant 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information                          9 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under FOIA 
Exemption 6 applies 
 
 
 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
