 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 12-03849 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for foreign 
influence and foreign preference. Accordingly, Applicant's request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) setting forth security concerns under 
Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) and C (Foreign Preference) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).1 Applicant signed her notarized Answer to the SOR on June 7, 2012, 
in which she admitted two of the three allegations under Guideline C, and the single 
allegation under Guideline B. She also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. 
 
                                                 
1 
See Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 6, 2012, and the case was 
assigned to me on July 16, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 30, 2012, 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 29, 2012. Department Counsel 
offered two exhibits, which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant 
testified and offered the testimony of five witnesses.  She offered 12 exhibits, which I 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through L. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 7, 2012. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
  
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to Colombia. They are set forth in 
documents offered by Department Counsel, marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and 
Applicant, marked as HE II. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of 
general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 34 years old, was born in Colombia, and earned a bachelor’s degree 
in industrial engineering there in 2000. She moved to the United States in 2001, and 
married a U.S. citizen in 2005. Her one-year-old daughter was born in the United 
States, and Applicant has not applied for Colombian citizenship for her. Applicant has 
worked for defense contractors since 2001. She is currently a senior systems engineer 
and program manager. In November 2010, she applied for her first security clearance. 
(GE 1, 2; AE B, C; Tr. 24-26, 64-67) 
 
In November 2009, after becoming a U.S. citizen in June 2009, Applicant 
renewed her Colombian identity (ID) card at her local Colombian consulate. In 
December 2009, when she traveled to Colombia, she tried to enter using her U.S. 
passport. and was informed that Colombian citizens were required by law to use a 
Colombian passport to enter. She used her foreign passport, and later, she renewed it 
because the expiration date was approaching. On her trips to Colombia between 
December 2009 and April 2012, she used her Colombian passport for each entry. She 
had never held a security clearance and was unaware of the security implications of 
possessing, renewing, and using a foreign ID card and passport. She has used her U.S. 
passport for all other foreign travel since becoming a U.S. citizen. (GE 2; AE C; 
Colombian laws 43 of 1993, 757, and 999; HE I, II; Tr. 26-30, 58, 63-64, 108-109) 
 
Applicant's company did not inform her about the security implications of 
possessing or using a foreign passport or ID card. When she received the SOR in May 
2012, Applicant realized that these documents presented a concern, and she contacted 
her facility security officer (FSO) and company management to determine how to 
 
 
3 
remedy the situation. On May 29, 2012, she surrendered her Colombian passport to her 
FSO. The FSO provided a letter confirming the surrender, and noting that if she 
requests the passport, the FSO will report the request. During her security interview, 
Applicant expressed her willingness to surrender her Colombian passport, and to 
renounce her Colombian citizenship. She provided evidence showing that she formally 
renounced her foreign citizenship in August 2012. Based on her renunciation, her 
Colombian ID card is no longer valid. Applicant has never voted in Colombia. She 
provided a copy of her U.S. state voter registration card. (GE 2; AE A, J, L; Tr. 26-30, 
40) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens of Colombia and reside there. Her mother is a 
homemaker and her father is the sales director for a private automotive company. They 
do not own property in Colombia, and Applicant has no expectation of inheriting 
property there. Her parents have no connection to the Colombian government. 
Applicant testified that they live in a safe area of a large city. The city is 18 hours travel 
time from the areas where kidnapping generally occurs, and 8 to 18 hours away from 
other dangerous areas. In more than 30 years in the city, they have not experienced 
violent crime. They are not politically active. Applicant talks with her father about once 
per week, and with her mother every few days. She visits them approximately annually. 
However, she also stated that, “My parents travel frequently to the U.S. As I mentioned, 
they love it, especially my mom. You know, she is always here and since they have their 
grand-daughter, they come to visit her quite a bit since. I, bottom line, do not need to go 
to Colombia to visit them.” (AE K; Tr. 31-34, 38-39, 41-42, 106) 
 
 Applicant has a brother2 who works for a private company that manufactures 
elevators. The company transferred him to Mexico, where he currently lives. She 
speaks with him every month or two. He has visited her in the United States but she has 
not visited him in Mexico. She also has a half-brother who lives in Colombia, but 
Applicant is unaware of his profession, and has no contact with him. Applicant has an 
aunt and uncle who live in Colombia. Her aunt is a homemaker and her uncle is a sound 
technician. She is not in touch with them, but does see them if she visits Colombia for 
annual holidays. She has ten other aunts, but does not keep in touch with them or see 
them, because they live in areas distant from her parents. She has a cousin who lives in 
Colombia and is a student, but Applicant is not in touch with her. Applicant does not 
have friends in Colombia, although she has friends who are from Colombia but live in 
the United States. (Tr. 43-54) 
 
Applicant has no financial or property interests in Colombia. She and her 
husband bought their current home in the United States in 2006, and it is worth 
approximately $350,000. They have home and automobile loans with U.S. companies. 
Their joint bank and investment accounts total approximately $37,000. Applicant's 
401(k) account has a balance of approximately $75,000. (AE E – I; Tr. 39-40, 65-66) 
                                                 
2
 Applicant's relationships with her brother, half-brother, aunts, uncle, cousin, and friends were not 
alleged in the SOR, and therefore, I do not rely on these relationships to reach my conclusions under 
Guideline B.  
 
 
4 
Applicant’s supervisor has worked with her on a daily basis since November 
2010. He noted in his letter that she has earned the trust and respect of her superiors 
and her Department of Defense customers. Because of his strong confidence in her 
abilities, he has promoted her to lead their primary contract. He served as a military 
officer for 20 years, and finds Applicant “qualified for the highest levels of public trust.” 
(AE D) 
 
Applicant's witnesses included her project lead, who has complete confidence in 
her judgment and integrity. A former supervisor noted that Applicant has handled 
proprietary and sensitive information with care and is trustworthy and dependable. The 
aunt and uncle of Applicant's husband also testified. His aunt is a retired intelligence 
officer for a U.S. agency, where she worked and held a top secret clearance with 
special access. She is aware of the security issues, but opined that Applicant is 
“absolutely” trustworthy and appropriate to hold access to classified information. Her 
husband, a retired lieutenant general, continues to work for high-level DoD officials. He 
has held a security clearance since the 1970s. He testified that he has known Applicant 
for nine years, and has met her parents. He is aware of the allegations, and knows of 
no evidence of a security risk. (Tr. 69-93) 
 
Applicant's husband has held a security clearance for two years. He testified 
that he has traveled five times to the city where Applicant's parents live in Colombia. 
Because he found it to be pleasant and safe, he had no concerns when his daughter 
traveled there with Applicant. He describes his wife as professional and honest. (Tr. 
93-107) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.3 Colombia is a constitutional, 
multiparty democracy with a population of approximately 44.8 million. Dual U.S.–
Colombian citizens must present a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia. 
 
The State Department warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to Colombia 
because violence by narco-terrorist groups continues to affect some cities and rural 
areas. While security in Colombia has improved significantly in recent years, terrorists 
and other criminal organizations kidnapped and held persons of all nationalities and 
occupations. The incidences of kidnapping in Colombia have diminished significantly in 
recent years.  
 
The Colombian government’s respect for human rights continues to improve. 
However, human rights violations continue, committed primarily by illegal armed 
groups and terrorist groups. These violations include political killings and kidnappings, 
forced disappearances, torture, and other serious human rights abuses.  
 
                                                 
3
 The facts cited concerning Colombia derive from Hearing Exhibits I and II. 
 
 
5 
The U.S. Secretary of State has designated three Colombian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), 
and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) – as foreign terrorist 
organizations. In 2009, these groups carried out bombings and other attacks in and 
around major urban areas, including against civilian targets.  
 
The United States remains fully committed to supporting the Colombian 
government in its efforts to defeat Colombian-based foreign terrorist organizations. The 
Colombian government continues vigorous law enforcement, intelligence, military and 
economic measures against the FARC, ELN, and AUC. The Colombian government 
has also increased its efforts with neighboring countries to thwart terrorist expansion, 
investigate terrorist activities inside and outside Colombia, seize assets, secure 
hostage release, and bring terrorists to justice. Colombia provided anti-terrorism 
training to nations in the region. The government continues to seek enhanced regional 
counterterrorism cooperation to target terrorist safe havens in vulnerable border areas. 
The United States–Colombia extradition relationship remains the most successful and 
comprehensive effort in the world.  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the (AG).4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A 
                                                 
4 
Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
6 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern regarding foreign preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then she or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following is relevant to the case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport.  
 
At the time Applicant applied for her security clearance in 2010, she possessed a valid 
foreign passport. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies.  
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
                                                 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant's foreign citizenship results from her birth in Colombia. She not only 
expressed willingness to renounce her Colombian citizenship, but followed through by 
formally renouncing it in August 2012. She provided supporting documentation. AG ¶¶ 
11(a) and 11(b) apply.  
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 11(e) also applies. Applicant had never held a 
clearance and did not understand the security implications of her foreign passport and 
ID card. Her FSO did not inform her that possessing or using an ID card or foreign 
passport was a security concern. When Applicant learned that her Colombian passport 
was a concern, she surrendered it to her FSO, who provided documentation confirming 
it. Her Colombian ID card is also invalid, based on her renunciation of her Colombian 
citizenship. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern related to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are relevant: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Colombia. Her relationship with 
these immediate family members raises security concerns about a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation or a possible conflict of interest. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 7(a) 
and (b) apply.  
 
 
 
8 
The foreign influence guideline also includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives 
in a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that 
relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.8 The nature of the 
foreign country must be considered in evaluating the likelihood of exploitation. Although 
terrorist groups operate in Colombia, and kidnappings occur, the Colombian 
government continues its vigorous law enforcement, as well as intelligence, military, 
and economic measures against these groups. The United States and Colombia share 
a strong relationship and cooperate on numerous fronts including energy, trade, 
counter-narcotics, and the environment. The evidence does not indicate that the 
Colombian government targets U.S. classified information. Applicant's father works in 
private industry and her mother is a homemaker; neither have connections to the 
Colombian government or military. Her parents have never experienced violence in the 
many decades they have lived in a large city in Colombia which is many hours away 
from the areas where suspect groups operate. It is unlikely that Applicant would have 
to choose between the interests of her parents and the interests of the United States. 
AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant's connections in the United States weigh in her favor when evaluating 
the question of exploitation or potential conflicts of interest based on ties to Colombia. 
She has been in the United States since 2001, working throughout that time for 
defense contractors. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and her husband and daughter 
are native-born U.S. citizens. She has close ties to her parents, and their contacts are 
frequent. However, neither of them have connections with the Colombian government 
or military. Because her parents visit the United States frequently, especially since the 
                                                 
8 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 09-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
9 
birth of their granddaughter, Applicant anticipates little need to visit Colombia in the 
future. She has no financial interests in Colombia, but has substantial financial assets 
in the United States, including bank accounts, a retirement account, and her home. 
She expressed her willingness to renounce her Colombian citizenship throughout the 
investigative process, and formally renounced it in 2012. She surrendered her foreign 
passport, once she learned that it presented a security concern. I conclude that 
Applicant would choose her strong U.S. ties over her foreign connections, in the event 
a conflict of interest arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
Applicant’s foreign passport and ID represented a security concern, but 
Applicant did not hold a security clearance when she used her foreign passport, and 
did not know that such documents constituted a security concern. Moreover, when she 
became aware of the concern, she surrendered her passport and renounced her 
Colombian citizenship. Applicant's parents in Colombia also a raised security concern 
because of the potential for conflicts of interest and exploitation. However, they have 
no connections with the Colombian government or military. Although some areas of the 
country are plagued by terrorists and narco-terrorism, Applicant's parents live many 
hours away from such areas, and the Colombian government is engaged in vigorous 
efforts against these groups. Applicant’s ties to her parents in Colombia are 
outweighed by her strong ties to the United States, including husband and daughter, 
her years of supporting the government through her work on defense projects, and her 
substantial financial assets in the United States. Applicant’s history, conduct, and 
 
 
10 
strong U.S. ties show that she is unlikely to make decisions that would harm the United 
States. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
