  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07919 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
From March 2006 until May 2009, Applicant used marijuana while he was in 
college. During the same period, he used Ritalin, Focalin, and Adderall without a 
prescription. Since leaving college, he no longer associates with individuals using illegal 
drugs and has stated he will not use illegal drugs or legal drugs illegally in the future. 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under drug involvement. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) on April 9, 2010, detailing security concerns under drug involvement. 
  
 On April 23, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 14, 2010. The FORM contained seven 
attachments. On July 22, 2010, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on August 21, 2010. As of October 6, 2010, when I was assigned 
this case, no response had been received.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he stated the information presented in the 
SOR was a misinterpretation of the information he had provided. He neither admitted 
nor denied the allegations in SOR; he merely restated his drug usage. I incorporate 
Applicant’s statement. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old CSS technician2 who has worked for a defense 
contractor since July 2009, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant 
attended college from September 2005 through May 2009. In May 2009, he obtained 
his bachelor’s degree. From March 2006 to May 2009, he used marijuana. On occasion 
during the same period, he used Focalin, Ritalin, and Adderall, without required 
prescriptions. In the spring of 2006, he purchased marijuana.  
 
 Ritalin, Focalin, and Adderall are all stimulant drugs, which increase alertness, 
concentration and overall cognitive performance. They improve attention and 
concentration, and help to avoid distractions.  
 
 Applicant used Focalin as a study aid in May and December 2008, and in March 
and May 2009, during final exam weeks and while writing his thesis. In May 2006, he 
used Ritalin once during exam week. He used Adderall once during exam week in 
December 2007 and once exam week in December 2008.  
 
 In July 2009, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). (Item 4) In response to question 23, he listed marijuana use 
between March 2006 and May 2009. He listed Ritalin and Focalin use during exams 
during the period of May 2006 through May 2009.  
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
2 The record fails to explain or define “CSS Technician.” 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 During a September 2009 subject interview (Item 5), Applicant stated he had 
used marijuana eight or nine times between March 2006 and May 2009. He obtained 
the marijuana from friends and on five occasions purchased small amounts (under a 
gram) of marijuana. During the interview, he stated he had used Focalin about 15 times, 
Ritalin once or twice, and Adderall three or four times to keep him awake and focused 
while in college. He obtained these prescription drugs from fellow students who had 
prescriptions for them. His use occurred from May 2006 to May 2009, while he was 
attending college. His intention is not to use marijuana or unprescribed drugs in the 
future. He stated had he taken a lighter college course load and drank more coffee he 
could have excelled on his college exams and thesis paper without having to use his 
classmates’ prescribed medication. (SOR Answer)  
 
Applicant no longer associates with illegal drug users, has not had a positive 
drug test, has never been diagnosed as being drug dependant or a drug abuser, and 
has not received any drug treatment. (Item 5) He has no plans to use illegal drugs in the 
future and regrets his past illegal drug use.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion of obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those conditions which apply include: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
Between March 2006 and May 2009, when he graduated from college, Applicant 
used marijuana, Ritalin, Focalin, and Adderall. He had no prescription for any of the 
drugs. During the same period, he made five small purchases of marijuana for his own 
use. AG ¶ 25(a) drug use and AG ¶ 25(c) purchase, apply.   
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Those 
conditions which may apply are: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
 Applicant last used marijuana in May 2009, approximately a year and a half ago. 
Applicant regrets his past drug use. Since leaving college, he no longer associates with 
drug-using individuals.  
 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”3 
3 In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the 
judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the absence of drug use for five years prior to the 
hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge excessively emphasized the drug use while holding 
a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and 
therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant has abstained from drug use for a year and a half year, his drug use 
occurred while he was in college, and the illegal use of prescription drugs occurred 
during exam weeks or when writing his thesis. These are events unlikely to recur. He 
fully disclosed his drug use on his e-QIP. He no longer associates with college students 
or his friends from college. He asserts he will not used illegal drugs in the future. There 
is reasonable certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. The mitigating 
conditions in AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b) apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant used marijuana 
infrequently in college and also used stimulants during exam weeks. Since leaving 
college, he no longer associates with illegal drug users and it is his stated intent no to 
use drugs in the future. Additionally, when questioned about his illegal drug usage on 
his e-QIP, he was forthcoming and listed his usage.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude he has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing]. It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a ─ 1.e:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
