KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline G; Guideline H; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption and drug
involvement but has not mitigated security concerns based on personal conduct and criminal
conduct.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s lack of candor in completing his SCA raises
security concerns that have not been mitigated is sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-11944.al
DATE: 08/15/2011
DATE: August 15, 2011
In Re:
--------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-11944
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Francis J. Flanagan, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 25, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct),
Guideline  G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline J (Criminal
Conduct)  of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 19, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge LeRoy
F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is inconsistent with the Judge’s findings, and whether the Judge’s decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s
unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is 56 years old.  He has
held a security clearance since 1998.  Applicant began consuming alcohol in high school.  While in
the Navy, he consumed two to four beers every day after working hours, and after his discharge he
sometimes consumed more than six beers at a sitting.  In the late 1990s he increased his beer
consumption because of his marital problems, occasionally consuming eight or nine beers in an
evening.  He began purchasing and using marijuana in the 1970s, using it five or six times a year.
He stopped using marijuana during the late 1980s, but resumed use in the 1990s, when he purchased
it four to six times a year and used it once or twice a month.  He stopped purchasing and using
marijuana and drinking alcohol after he was seriously injured in a motorcycle accident in 2009.
Applicant was involved in alcohol-related driving incidents in 1977, 1995, 2004, 2007, and
culminating in the 2009 accident where he was intoxicated and riding his motorcycle.  Additionally,
in 2006, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana and driving with a suspended or
revoked license.  In October 2009, Applicant was stopped for having an expired inspection sticker
and arrested for driving on a suspended license.
Applicant began court-ordered outpatient treatment in December 2009.  He was discharged
from the program in February 2010.  The diagnostic summary comments favorably on his progress
but does not include a prognosis.  Applicant received counseling from a psychologist for about six
weeks before the hearing.  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application in May 2008.  When asked if he had
ever been charged with or convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs, he did not disclose
his DUI arrests in 1977 and 1995 or his arrest for possession of marijuana in 2006.  On the same
application he also did not disclose his marijuana use.  At the hearing, he admitted that he
intentionally falsified his answer to this question because he was concerned that it would harm his
career if he admitted his marijuana use.  In an interview with a security investigator in April 2010,
Appellant admitted that he deliberately lied during prior interviews about his marijuana use and the
amount of his alcohol consumption.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant mitigated the security concerns
under the Alcohol Consumption and the Drug Involvement Guidelines.  Under the Personal Conduct
Guideline, Applicant failed to mitigate numerous instances of deliberate falsification of his past
alcohol, drug, and arrest history during official government inquiries.  Likewise, Applicant was
unable to mitigate the government’s security concerns under the Criminal Conduct Guideline
relating to his falsifications.  
Applicant argues that the Judge’s ultimate decision is inconsistent with his findings.  He
states that, although the Judge concluded that he had mitigated the security concerns based upon
alcohol consumption and drug involvement, unfortunately the Judge found that he had not mitigated
the security concerns based upon personal conduct and criminal conduct.  Applicant asserts that his
alcohol consumption and drug involvement was the source of his personal conduct and criminal
conduct.  He argues that a finding of mitigation for alcohol consumption and drug involvement
should likewise mitigate further concerns about his behavior rising from said previous activities.
Applicant also maintains that he is not vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress.  Applicant’s
assertions do not establish error on the part of the Judge.  
Applicant stresses the mitigating evidence relating to his alcohol and drug use, and focuses
on the underlying conduct when arguing that the Judge’s adverse decision concerning his numerous
falsifications should be reversed.  Applicant appears to argue that the security significance of the
falsifications derives from the security significance of the events that were the subject of the
falsifications.  This argument lacks merit.  An act of falsification has security significance
independent of any significance of the underlying conduct.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-19278 at
7-8 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2003).  The mitigation of the underlying conduct has little bearing on the
security significance of the falsification, particularly in a case like this one, involving a pattern of
multiple falsifications.  Additionally, in the context of this case, Applicant’s assertion that the record
evidence establishes that he is not subject to coercion, exploitation, or duress does not establish
error.
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is
sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
   Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields     
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
