                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06445
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 30, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on May 21, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On February 9, 2011, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on February 27, 2011, and March 1, 2011,
and he requested an administrative hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This
case was assigned to the undersigned on March 17, 2011.  A notice of hearing was
issued on March 24, 2011, and the hearing was scheduled for April 12, 2011.  At the
hearing the Government presented eleven exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits
1 through 11, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant called one witness
and presented twenty exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through T.  He also
testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on April
2
26, 2011, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.
The Applicant submitted four Post-Hearing Exhibits, which were admitted without
objection, and are referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 1 through 4.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on April 27, 2011.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 47 years old and married.  He has a Bachelor’s Degree in
Electrical Engineering.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Division Manager
and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted allegations 1(a), 1(b), and 1(d) of the SOR.  He denied
allegations 1(c), and 1(e), with some explanations.  Credit Reports of the Applicant
dated June 3, 2009; July 1, 2010; November 4, 2010; and April 11, 2011; reflect that the
Applicant was indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the SOR, in an amount
totaling approximately $45,000.00.  (Government Exhibits 7, 8 9 and 11.)
The Applicant served on active duty in the United States Air Force from June
1986 to June 1991.  During his five year military career, he received the Air Force
Commendation Medal and Citation, and was honorably discharged as an officer.  Since
then he has worked in the defense industry and has held a security clearance since
1986.  He has never had a security violation.
Prior to 2005 the Applicant had no delinquent debts, tax liens, charge offs or
repossessions, and his credit was good.  In 2005 the Applicant and his partner set up
an S corporation to start a natural health care business.  At first, the Applicant was
working part-time; but by May 2007, it was a full time job and in full swing.  Due to the
combination of a bad economy, and a soured relationship with his business partner, the
business failed and in April 2008 they closed the doors.  The partner left abruptly, and
the Applicant was saddled with all of the debt.  As a result of the failed business, the
Applicant became excessively indebted.  Not only for debts directly related to the
business such as the business licenses, the equipment leases, and credit cards that
were all in his name, but since he had self-funded the business by pulling between
$260,000 and $300,000 from his 401k, he was subject to penalties, and interest and
back taxes.  (Tr. p. 88.)  In order to survive, the Applicant sold a lot of his household
3
goods, he was evicted from his rental house, and had to forego Christmas for the family.
They were forced to move in with a friend.  
In March 2009, the Applicant became employed and since then he has been
addressing his delinquent debts.  His plan was to first address his immediate personal
and business debt, then the state and and federal taxes, and then any other unsecured
debt, such as credit card debt.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  As of present, he has
paid over $36,000 in debts, plus tax attorney and tax accountant fees in addition to his
current living expenses.
The following debts set forth in the SOR became delinquent as a result of the
failed business.  A state tax lien was filed against the Applicant for tax year 2008, in the
amount of $1,390.00.  The Applicant states that the accurate amount he owed was
$1,309.97.  He filed his state, federal and corporate tax returns and entered into a
payment plan to resolve the debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibits I, L, N and Q.)  He has been
making bi-monthly payments since July 2010.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A and C.)  A state
tax lien was filed against the Applicant for tax years 2007, in the amount of
approximately $25,700.00.  The Applicant contends that the actual amount owed was
$12,137.00.  He has filed his state, federal and corporate tax returns and has entered
into a payment plan to resolve the debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibits H, K, M and P.)  He has
been making payments of approximately $900.00 monthly since August 2010.  (Tr. p.
59.)  His current balance owed to date is only about $4,615.43.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A
and D.)  The Applicant became indebted to a creditor for a debt owed in the amount of
approximately $5,212.00.  He contends that the amount owed on the account was
actually $513.16.  He has been making payments toward the debt since April 2009, and
the balance currently owed is only $313.16.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A and E.)  The
Applicant became indebted to a creditor in the amount of approximately $12,000.00 in
credit card debt.  The Applicant plans to set up a payment plan to pay it once he has
paid off his back taxes.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A and F.)  The Applicant was indebted to a
creditor in the amount of $541.00.  He has paid the debt in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A
and G.)
The Applicant’s wife testified that she keeps track of the finances in the
household.  Before her husband started his business, he had no charged off accounts,
no tax liens or delinquent debts.  After the business closed in September 2008, and until
her husband became employed, they were unable to pay their debts.  Since 2009 they
have been cleaning up their credit.  Their attorney filed the proper documentation to
close the corporation and they started setting up payment plans with the tax authorities
to pay their back taxes.  (Tr. pp. 46-85.)
A letter from the Applicant’s Facility Security Officer dated April 8, 2011, indicates
that the Applicant began his employment through an employment agency and because
of his outstanding performance and professional behavior, he was hired on as a
permanent employee.  He was subsequently promoted largely for his ethical and
exemplary performance.  He has kept her apprised of the details of his failed business
in the past and his plan to resolve his indebtedness.  The Applicant is said to show
4
integrity, and a willingness to maintain security at a high level.  He was also
instrumental in allowing their facility to secure the rating of “Commendable” in their
Defense Security Service security inspection conducted on February 28, 2011.
(Applicant’s Exhibit T.) 
In March 2010, the Applicant received a total bonus of $14,500.00 from his
employer for his outstanding work performance during 2009.  (Applicant’s Exhibit S.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and,
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and,
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
5
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
6
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that circumstances largely beyond the Applicant’s control,
namely, his failed business, caused his financial difficulties.  Before he started his
business, he paid his bills on time and he had good credit.  When he and his partner fell
out, the Applicant was stuck with all of the debt.  He has taken responsibility for the debt
and since 2009, has been working diligently within his means to satisfy his
indebtedness.  
Under the particular circumstance of this case, this was an isolated incident that
will not recur since the Applicant no longer has the business.  In addition, he has made
a good-faith effort to resolve his past due indebtedness.  Since 2009, he has paid off
about $36,000 in bad debt acquired as a result of the failed business.  He has filed his
personal and business tax returns and is paying his back taxes.  Once they are paid in
full, he will begin to resolve his remaining debt.  He does not plan on incurring any new
debt.  He has acted reasonably, responsibly and prudently.  He understands the
importance of paying his bills on time and living within his means.  He also knows that
he must remain fiscally responsible in the future.  There is clear evidence of financial
rehabilitation.  The Applicant has demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial
affairs and that he is fiscally responsible.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant
has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is
sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
7
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and, 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a  willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, including the Applicant’s
favorable military and work history.  They mitigate the negative effects of his financial
indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his ability to safeguard classified
information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
8
