 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01048 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Guideline F (Financial Considerations) security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 24, 2010, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
June 21, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 13, 2010. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through G, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old security officer who works for a defense contractor. 
She has worked for her current employer for about three years. She graduated from 
high school in June 2001 and attended two years of college. She is married and has 
one child who is four years old. This is the first time that she has applied for a security 
clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts totaling about $41,532. The debts were 
listed on credit reports obtained on May 1, 2009; October 19, 2010; and May 26, 2010. 
In her answer, Applicant admitted each of the alleged debts. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
 Twenty-one of the alleged debts are medical debts totaling $31,524. The 
remaining debts include two student loans totaling $6,478 and four consumer debts 
totaling $3,530. Applicant primarily attributes her financial difficulties to medical 
problems that arose while she was pregnant in 2007. Due to her medical problems, she 
was placed in an unpaid leave status at work from January 2007 to July 2008. Initially, 
she did not have medical insurance to cover her medical expenses. During her 
pregnancy, she met with a social worker, applied for, and obtained Medicaid coverage 
for a period of time. Medicaid covered certain pre-delivery and delivery medical bills and 
a gallbladder operation. SOR ¶ 1.d is a $12,855 medical debt that arose from an eight-
day period of hospitalization. She incurred that debt before she applied for Medicaid. 
She also testified that Medicaid covered none of the alleged medical debts and 
acknowledged she was financially responsible for them. She indicated that she was 
unaware of most of the medical debts until she applied for her security clearance. One 
of the consumer debts resulted from Applicant buying an item for her father with the 
understanding that he would make the installment payments, but he failed to do so.3 
 
 In the SOR, there are two sets of duplicate debts. First, the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.b (medical account # 2939400 in the amount of $481) is a duplicate of the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.p (medical account # 2939400 in the amount $691). Second, the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.f (medical account #1083102172 in the amount $2,207) is a duplicate of the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.q (medical account #1083102172 in the amount $2,867).4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 29-31; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 1-7. 
 
3 Tr. at 33-38, 45, 48-59, 68-70; GE 3. Applicant’s child was born in August 2007. See AE G. 
 
4 Tr. at 42-45; SOR.  
 
 
3 
 
 After returning to work, Applicant paid SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.aa, the two student 
loans. In about June 2009, she established a debt management program (DMP) with a 
financial management agency. The alleged debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b/1.p (medical debt 
$691), 1.f/1.q (medical debt of $2,867), 1.n (collection account of $1,111), 1.y (collection 
account of $1,249), and 1.z (collection account of $677) are included in the DMP. Under 
the DMP, Applicant makes monthly payments of $222 to the financial management 
agency that, in turn, disburses that money to creditors registered in that program. One 
debt not listed in that SOR is included the DMP. The terms of the DMP provide that 
Applicant remains solely responsibility for the payment of unregistered debts.5 
 
 In attempting to resolve her debts, Applicant obtained financial counseling from 
her bank and the financial management agency. At the hearing, she was honest and 
forthcoming about her delinquent debts and has accepted responsibility for them. She 
intends to pay off her remaining delinquent debts. Once she pays the debts listed in the 
DMP, she will add more delinquent debts to that program. She estimated the delinquent 
debts will be resolved within five years.6 
 
 Applicant is meeting all of her current financial obligations. Her monthly income is 
about $1,500 and her monthly expenses are about $1,387, including the DMP payment. 
Her husband was unemployed for about a year, but recently started working again. 
While unemployed, he collected unemployment compensation that he used towards 
paying their rent. The amount of his current monthly income is unknown. She and her 
husband have about $3,600 in savings. At the time of the hearing, her child was 
covered by health insurance, but she and her husband still were not covered. They do 
not qualify currently for Medicaid and her company’s health insurance program is too 
expensive. Her husband will become eligible for health insurance with his company in 
about three months, and she expects to be covered by his insurance.7 
 
 Applicant’s second-level supervisor, who served 27 years in law enforcement 
positions, testified that Applicant is extremely dependable. He indicated that, as a 
general rule, employees who lose their security clearances are removed from the 
worksite immediately. However, “[s]enior management [of the defense contractor] 
determined that [Applicant] has done such a quality job and that her work performance 
is above reproach that they have allowed her to remain on site. . . which speaks 
volumes. . . .” He knew of no other employee in that situation who was allowed to 
remain on site. He stated that “all employees should be like her and I don’t say that 
lightly.”8 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 33-38, 59-61, 68-69, 71-76; GE 2, 7; AE F. 
 
6 Tr. at 38, 42, 59-60, 74-76, 82. 
 
7 Tr. at 38-40, 61-67; AE D, E. Applicant’s income tax refunds were withheld to repay, at least in 
part, her student loans. See GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. at 38-40. 
 
 
4 
 
 A plant protection manager described Applicant’s work ethic and performance as 
“no less than exceptional.” The manager also indicated she is a hard-working security 
officer who takes her work very seriously. He considers her a great asset to the 
company.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 36-38; AE A, B, C. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts that she was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy for a period of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
As a result of medical complications arising from a pregnancy, Applicant was 
placed in an unpaid leave status by her employer from January 2007 to July 2008. She 
did not have medical insurance to cover a number of medical expenses incurred during 
that pregnancy, including an eight-day period of hospitalization. She eventually obtained 
Medicaid coverage that paid for various medical expenses for a period of time. Her 
husband was also recently unemployed for about a year. Appellant’s medical problems, 
her period of unpaid leave, and her husband’s period of unemployment were conditions 
beyond her control that severely impacted her financial situation. She returned to work 
in July 2008. Since then, she obtained financial counseling and paid her two student 
loans totaling $6,478. In about June 2009, she established a DMP and pays $222 per 
month into that program. Six delinquent debts, including four of the five consumer debts, 
are being addressed in the DMP. Given her current financial situation, she is applying a 
reasonable amount of her income towards the delinquent debts. She intends to satisfy 
all of her delinquent debts. Once she satisfies the debts registered in the DMP, she will 
add other delinquent debts to that program. Currently, she is meeting her current 
financial obligations and expects to obtain medical insurance coverage soon. Her 
financial problems are being resolved in a prudent manner and are unlikely to recur. 
She has acted responsibly in addressing her financial difficulties. I find that AG ¶¶ 20(b) 
and 20(c) apply and AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) partially apply.  
 
 A review of the SOR revealed that two sets of the alleged debts are duplicates. 
Specifically, SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.p are duplicates as are 1.f and 1.q. Even though 
Applicant admitted each of the alleged debts, I find that she has a legitimate basis for 
disputing SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f and that AG ¶ 20(e) applies to those two duplicate 
allegations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s service to her employer has been exceptional. As a general rule, her 
employer immediately removes employees who lose their security clearances from the 
worksite. Because of her dependability, work ethic, and performance, Applicant’s 
employer has made an exception for her. After her interim security clearance was 
withdrawn, her employer placed her in a security officer position in which she did not 
need a security clearance. This action highlights the level of trust and confidence her 
employer has in her.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.aa:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
