 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01166 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jason M. Berent, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant rebutted personal conduct security concerns and mitigated criminal 
conduct concerns, but he has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations), E (personal conduct), and J (criminal conduct). 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 25, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 16, 2011. DOHA issued 
 
2 
 
a notice of hearing on June 16, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
July 12, 2011.  
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13. GE 1 through 12 were 
admitted without objection. The Government did not provide Applicant with prior notice 
that it was submitting GE 13. Applicant objected to its admission. Applicant was given 
until July 29, 2011, to submit a request to reconvene to address GE 13. No request to 
reconvene was made. GE 13 is admitted. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits 
(AE) A, A(1) through A(6), and B. AE A, A(2) through A(6), and B were admitted without 
objection. AE(1) was admitted over the Government’s objection. The record was held 
open until August 5, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional information. No additional 
material was submitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is on unpaid 
leave pending his security clearance adjudication. He is a high school graduate. He 
married in 1977 and divorced in 1987. He married his current wife in 1990. He has five 
adult children.1 
  
 Applicant and his wife started a company (Corporation X) in about 2000. The 
company was incorporated as a Subchapter C corporation.2 Although personal liability 
for the corporation’s debts, for the most part, does not pass to the shareholders, many 
creditors would not contract with the corporation unless Applicant, his wife, or both of 
them, also agreed to be on the account in an individual capacity.3 Responsible officers 
in the corporation are required to ensure that payroll taxes are paid to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). If the taxes are not paid, the responsible officers can be held 
personally liable for the taxes.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 69-70, 100-101, 122; GE 1. 
 
2 For federal income tax purposes, a C corporation is recognized as a separate taxpaying entity. A 
corporation conducts business, realizes net income or loss, pays taxes and distributes profits to 
shareholders. See www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=98240,00.html. 
 
3 Tr. at 32-33, 40-41; GE 7, 8, 11; AE A.  
 
4 See IRS Publication 15 (January 2007), Employers Tax Guide at page 23. www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
prior/p15--2007.pdf: 
 
Trust fund recovery penalty. If income, social security, and Medicare taxes that a 
corporation must withhold from employee wages are not withheld or are not deposited or 
paid to the United States Treasury, the trust fund recovery penalty may apply. The 
penalty is the full amount of the unpaid trust fund tax. This penalty may apply to you if 
these unpaid taxes cannot be immediately collected from the business.  
 
The trust fund recovery penalty may be imposed on all persons who are determined by 
the IRS to be responsible for collecting, accounting for, and paying these taxes, and who 
acted willfully in not doing so.  
 
 
3 
 
 On August 23, 2007, Corporation X entered into an agreement with another 
corporation (Corporation Y), in which Corporation Y would receive 51% of Corporation 
X, with Applicant and his wife retaining a 49% interest in Corporation X. In return, 
Corporation Y agreed to “take responsibility clearing all outstanding debt and assumes 
all future debts, provide bonding for [Corporation X].”5  
 
 On October 5, 2007, Corporation X entered into a servicing contract with a third 
business (Company Z). On April 16, 2008, Corporation X assigned its contract with 
Company Z to Corporation Y. In return, Corporation Y agreed to assume Corporation 
X’s IRS debt, as follows: 
 
[Corporation Y] acknowledges prior agreement (to pay said debt) with 
[Corporation X] for debt due IRS of approximately $196,372.57, rent of 
[Corporation X’s] equipment and tools on project, purchase of equipment, 
list of debt listed on prior agreement, retainage due [Corporation X] on 
said Contract [with Company Z].6 
 
 Applicant stated that Corporation Y failed to honor its contractual agreements. He 
stated Corporation Y did not pay the payroll taxes due to the IRS and did not pay other 
liabilities.7  
 
 On May 20, 2008, Applicant’s wife, signing as the president of Corporation X, 
filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy on behalf of Corporation X. The petition listed a secured 
claim to a bank (Bank W) for $272,966. The total of the unsecured claims exceeded 
$1.6 million. Included in the unsecured claims were claims to the IRS for $87,890 and a 
series of claims to Bank W totaling $95,810. There was also a $450,000 claim to 
Applicant and his wife. Corporation X also filed a suit in bankruptcy court against 
Corporation Y and its owner. The bankruptcy and the included lawsuit were dismissed 
in 2009.8 
 
 In June 2010, Corporation X, Applicant, and his wife filed a lawsuit against 
Corporation Y, its owners, and other entities, alleging breach of contract. The petition 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
A responsible person can be an officer or employee of a corporation, an accountant, or 
a volunteer director/trustee. A responsible person also may include one who signs 
checks for the corporation or otherwise has authority to cause the spending of business 
funds.  
 
Willfully means voluntarily, consciously, and intentionally. A responsible person acts 
willfully if the person knows the required actions are not taking place. (emphasis in 
original) 
 
5 Tr. at 28-36; GE 7, 8; AE A, A(2). 
 
6 AE A(3). 
 
7 Tr. at 37-39; GE 7, 8; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 28; GE 2, 5, 7, 8, 11; AE A, A(1). 
 
4 
 
alleges that Corporation Y failed to pay the IRS $196,372 and the debts owed to Bank 
W. The petition also alleges: 
 
Defendants also: (1) interfered with Plaintiffs’ contracts and business 
relations with third parties; (2) stole, misdirected and/or misappropriated 
money properly owing to Plaintiffs; and (3) stole and/or otherwise obtained 
unlawful possession of Plaintiffs’ tools, equipment, vehicles and other 
property.9 
 
 The lawsuit is still pending. The defendants have filed a countersuit against 
Corporation X, Applicant, and his wife. Applicant submitted a copy of his petition; he did 
not submit a copy of the answer or the countersuit petition.10  
 
 Bank W filed a lawsuit against Corporation X, Applicant, and his wife. The parties 
entered into an agreed judgment in November 2010. Corporation X and Applicant’s 
wife, jointly and severally, were ordered to pay $282,526 to Bank W, with interest 
accruing at the rate of 5% a year. Corporation X and Applicant’s wife, jointly and 
severally, were also ordered to pay $4,584 to Bank W, with interest accruing at the rate 
of 18% a year, plus $20,000 in attorney’s fees. The case against Applicant was 
dismissed with prejudice. Applicant’s attorney stated that in exchange for the agreed 
judgment, Bank W agreed not to pursue efforts to collect on the judgment until the 
lawsuit against Corporation Y is resolved.11 
 
 The SOR alleges the Chapter 11 bankruptcy, five delinquent debts to Bank W, a 
department store credit card account, two delinquent medical debts, a telephone 
company account, $87,890 owed to the IRS, and a past-due mortgage that is in 
foreclosure. The debts were listed on Applicant’s credit reports. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant denied owing all the debts except the tax debt and the mortgage, which 
he admitted with explanations. 
 
 The debts to Bank W were alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($1,670), 1.e ($1,383), 1.f 
($27,021), 1.h ($6,859), and 1.l ($991). Applicant stated that some or all of the debts 
were Corporation X’s debts that should have been paid by Corporation Y. He admitted 
that he was also liable to the bank because he personally guaranteed the accounts. 
When Corporation X filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy, it listed six unsecured accounts with 
Bank W totaling $95,810. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f were listed in the 
petition. Applicant is only listed on his credit report as an authorized user on the SOR ¶ 
1.e debt, so he is not personally liable for that debt. The bankruptcy petition does not 
appear to include the Bank W debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h, and 1.l.12 
 
                                                          
9 AE A(4). 
 
10 Tr. at 39-40, 82-84; GE 11; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. at 44-48; AE A(5), B. 
 
12 Tr. at 40-48, 64-68; GE 4, 6-12; AE A. 
 
5 
 
 The Bank W debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is listed on Applicant’s credit reports as a 
joint account. The Bank W debt in SOR ¶ 1.l is listed on the credit reports as an 
individual account. Applicant stated that those two debts were Corporation X accounts, 
but he submitted no supporting documentation. He stated that the files from Corporation 
X were turned over to Corporation Y. He stated that his bankruptcy attorney has copies 
of the files from Corporation X, but the attorney has not turned them over to Applicant or 
his present attorney.13 
 
 The $6,859 Bank W debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h was transferred to a collection 
company. It appears to be an individual debt that was charged off, with a date of last 
action in February 2007. Applicant stated that he believed this debt was his son’s 
responsibility. The debt was reported by TransUnion on the credit reports obtained in 
November 2008 and May 2010. It was listed on the January 2011 Equifax credit report 
under Bank W as a charged-off account that was transferred or sold. It was not 
separately reported by Equifax under the collection company that received the debt. 
Applicant did not submit any documentation corroborating his statement that the debt 
belonged to his son.14 
 
 Applicant denied responsibility for the $1,694 delinquent department store debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. The debt is listed on the November 2008 credit report as a joint 
account that was opened in 1984, with a date of last action in November 2004. 
Applicant stated this was his wife’s debt from before they married. It is listed on later 
reports as charged off and transferred, with a zero balance. There is no indication on 
Applicant’s credit reports of a subsequent collection company handling the debt.15  
 
 Applicant acknowledged responsibility for the medical debts of $434 and $28, as 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. The credit reports indicate these debts became 
delinquent in 2008. Applicant was asked about the debts during his background 
interview in December 2008. He did not recognize the $28 debt. He stated that his 
insurance company paid the $434 debt. He was asked about the debts again in June 
2010. He stated that he would pay his medical debts “within the next year or so.” He 
testified that he was unable to pay the debts because of the financial problems resulting 
from Corporation Y’s failure to honor the contract. He obtained a job with a defense 
contractor in October 2008, but he was placed on unpaid leave in February 2011, when 
he lost his interim security clearance. The company is still sponsoring him and will rehire 
him should he obtain a security clearance. Applicant stated that he will pay his medical 
debts when he is rehired.16 
 
 Applicant denied responsibility for the $322 delinquent debt to a telephone 
company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant stated that be believed the debt resulted 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 40-48, 64-72, 81-82; GE 4, 6-12; AE A. 
 
14 Tr. at 72-78; GE 4, 6-12; AE A. 
 
15 Tr. at 48-53, 101-102; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 6-10, 12; AE A. 
 
16 Tr. at 27, 68-72; GE 1, 4, 6-12. 
 
 
6 
 
from damage done by Corporation X to the telephone company’s equipment. He stated 
that Corporation Y should have paid the debt. The debt is listed on the most recent 
credit report as a charged-off account that was opened in April 2001, with a date of last 
action in April 2009. Applicant did not submit any business records from Corporation X, 
or any other documentary evidence, to establish that this was Corporation X’s debt.17 
 
 Applicant’s mortgage is in foreclosure, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. Applicant’s 
position, as related through the attorney addressing that matter, is that Applicant 
maintained homeowner’s insurance as required, but the mortgage company improperly 
“force paid” an additional policy, which caused an increase in the monthly mortgage 
payment. When Applicant continued with his normal payments, he fell behind. The May 
2010 credit report lists the mortgage as $4,221 past due, with a balance of $194,747. 
The January 2011 credit report does not show a past-due amount, but it shows the 
mortgage in foreclosure, with a balance of $194,000. Applicant acknowledges that he 
has stopped making the mortgage payments in accordance with his attorney’s advice. 
His attorney filed an affidavit on March 25, 2011, in which he stated that “[i]t is 
customary, particularly in [his] dealings with [mortgage company’s attorney] for the 
homeowner to not pay their mortgage until the dispute is resolved. This is sometimes 
the case because it may turn out that the mortgage company may actually owe the 
homeowner money.” The attorney also wrote in that affidavit that he was working with 
the mortgage company’s attorney, and they were “fairly close to having the dispute 
resolved in a mutually acceptable manner.” 18  
 
 Applicant admitted that he is liable to the IRS for Corporation X’s payroll taxes, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. He stated that they owed the IRS in the area of $150,000 when 
the company was sold. He stated that the money was from the previous quarter, and 
that the taxes “[were] current, but it was coming up to the point that [they] needed to be 
paid.” He stated they would have been due at the end of the quarter. Applicant’s 
statement is inconsistent with the IRS rules that payroll taxes must be paid semiweekly 
or monthly. The IRS also requires that once $100,000 is withheld from employees’ 
salaries, the taxes must be paid the next day, notwithstanding the company’s normal 
payment schedule.19 Applicant later testified that the payroll taxes stopped being paid 
after the sale to Corporation Y. He stated that he believed the amount currently owed is 
about $150,000. Applicant stated that he had documents from the IRS computing 
specifically how they calculated the tax liability and the current balance. He did not 
submit any of those documents. The IRS has placed a lien on his house. He stated that 
IRS will be paid when the lawsuit is won or settled. He stated that he will make payment 
arrangements with the IRS if his lawsuit is unsuccessful.20 
 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 55, 93-96; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 12; AE A. 
 
18 Tr. at 53-54, 78-80; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 10, 12; AE B. 
 
19 See  IRS Publication 15 (January 2007), Employers Tax Guide at pages 18-23. www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
prior/p15--2007.pdf. 
 
20 Tr. at 30-37, 61-62, 102-104; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 11. 
 
7 
 
 Applicant was arrested in February 2007 and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI) and open alcohol container. In February 2008, he was found guilty 
and sentenced to 90 days in jail, which was suspended, probation for 18 months, a 
$1,500 fine, and court costs. Applicant acknowledged his conduct was wrong and 
stupid. He has not been arrested or charged with any offense since the DWI arrest.21  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
October 2008. Under the question asking about alcohol-related charges, he listed his 
DWI conviction. He answered all the pertinent financial questions in the negative. 
Applicant credibly testified that he did not intentionally falsify the SF 86. He stated that 
he did not have to list the bankruptcy because it was a corporate bankruptcy and not his 
personal bankruptcy. He did not list any delinquent debts because they were corporate 
debts, they were not delinquent when he submitted the SF 86, or he was unaware of the 
debts.22 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant did not intentionally 
falsify his SF 86.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
21 Tr. at 56-57, 99-100; GE 1, 3; AE A. 
 
22 Tr. at 27-28, 55-57, 97-99; GE 1; AE A, A(6). 
 
 
8 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2008, and the 
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2009. That bankruptcy was filed by Corporation X, not by 
Applicant in a personal capacity. It raises no independent security concerns beyond 
those raised in other allegations. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
9 
 
 Applicant is only listed as an authorized user on the SOR ¶ 1.e debt, so he is not 
personally liable for that debt. SOR ¶ 1.e is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to Corporation Y’s breach of contract 
and failure to pay Corporation X’s debts, including payroll taxes owed to the IRS and 
corporate accounts owed to Bank W. However, the record is replete with concerns and 
unanswered questions.  
 
 Applicant stated the payroll taxes are paid quarterly, and they were not yet due 
when he and his wife sold 51% of their company to Corporation Y. That is contrary to 
the IRS requirement that payroll taxes be paid semiweekly or monthly, and that once 
$100,000 is withheld from employees’ salaries, the taxes must be paid the next day, 
notwithstanding the company’s normal payment schedule. Applicant did not adequately 
explain why he and his wife did not pay Corporation X’s payroll taxes when due, instead 
of relying on Corporation Y to do so. He stated that he had documents from the IRS 
computing specifically how they calculated the tax liability and the current balance. 
Those documents would have been helpful in evaluating this case, but Applicant did not 
submit any of those documents. 
 
 Applicant stated that all or most of his Bank W accounts were corporate 
accounts. Applicant admitted that creditors would not contract with the corporation 
unless Applicant, his wife, or both of them, also agreed to be on the account in an 
 
10 
 
individual capacity. Corporation X’s bankruptcy petition listed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
and 1.f, so I accept those debts were tied to the corporation. He did not submit any 
business records or other documentation establishing that the three other Bank W debts 
were in any way tied to the corporation. 
 
 Bank W sued Corporation X, Applicant, and his wife. The parties entered into an 
agreed judgment in November 2010. Corporation X and Applicant’s wife, jointly and 
severally, were ordered to pay Bank W $282,526 and $4,584, plus $20,000 in attorney’s 
fees. The case against Applicant was dismissed with prejudice. Applicant did not submit 
any evidence establishing which Bank W debts were involved in the lawsuit. I note that 
Corporation X’s petition listed a secured claim to Bank W for $272,966 and unsecured 
claims to Bank W totaling $95,810. I will accept that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f was included 
in the lawsuit, and Applicant is no longer personally liable for that debt. I am unable to 
do so for the remaining Bank W debts. I find that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f has been 
resolved, and AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable to that debt.  
 
 Applicant stated that he believed the $6,859 Bank W/collection company debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h was his son’s responsibility. He did not submit any supporting 
documentation. 
 
 Applicant stated that be believed the $322 delinquent debt to a telephone 
company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, resulted from damage done by Corporation X to the 
telephone company’s equipment. He stated that Corporation Y should have paid the 
debt. He did not submit any business records from Corporation X, or any other 
documentary evidence, to establish that this debt was Corporation X’s responsibility. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has not been paying his mortgage. It is unclear how 
many payments, if any, he has made in the last year. He may have a legitimate dispute 
with the mortgage company, and his attorney indicated that it is normal procedure to not 
pay the mortgage until the dispute is resolved. However, the lawyer also indicated in 
March 2011 that they were “fairly close to having the dispute resolved in a mutually 
acceptable manner.” In the meantime, Applicant is not making any mortgage payments, 
and his home apparently is in foreclosure. 
 
 Applicant has known about the two medical debts since at least December 2008. 
He has taken no action to pay or dispute those debts. 
 
 Applicant stated that the $1,694 delinquent department store debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.g was his wife’s debt from before they married. It is listed on the credit reports 
as a joint account that was opened in 1984, which was six years before Applicant 
married his wife. The debt is listed on the most recent credit reports as charged off and 
transferred, with a zero balance. There is no indication on Applicant’s credit reports of a 
subsequent collection company handling the debt. I find that AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to 
this debt. It is not applicable to any other debts.  
 
 In summary, Applicant has taken no real action to pay any of his debts. He may 
have a legitimate and winning lawsuit against Corporation Y, or he may not. Applicant 
 
11 
 
did not submit sufficient information to convince me that his financial issues will be 
resolved within a reasonable time. I find that Applicant’s finances are not yet under 
control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they 
are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(e) are not applicable, except as 
discussed above. I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR 
¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
12 
 
Applicant’s DWI conviction is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶ 3.a cross alleges the falsification of the Applicant’s SF 86 as a criminal 
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Applicant did not intentionally falsify the SF 86, and he did 
not violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001. SOR ¶ 3.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s DWI arrest occurred in February 2007, more than four years ago. He 
is appropriately remorseful for the conduct, and he has not been arrested or charged for 
an offense since that date. I find there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, and 
Applicant’s criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
 
13 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, E, and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant may win or settle his lawsuit and pay all his delinquent debts. That 
could be years down the road, or it could never happen. Applicant has left me with 
unanswered questions and unresolved concerns about his finances. Under AG ¶ 2(b), I 
am required to resolve my doubt in favor of national security. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
rebutted personal conduct security concerns, and he mitigated criminal conduct 
concerns, but he has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
