                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03174 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse, including four alcohol-related driving 
offenses. Moreover, he falsified his 2006 security clearance application, made false 
statements to Government investigators, associated with foreign prostitutes and a 
foreign business man whom he believed was a member of organized crime, assisted 
the business man to establish a money laundering scheme, and failed to disclose such 
associations. Considering his falsifications, questionable behavior, and overall lack of 
credibility, Applicant’s past behavior continues to cast doubt on his reliability, judgment, 
and ability and willingness to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 26, 
2006. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators 
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
On January 19, 2011 and March 2, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of 
reasons (SOR) and an amended SOR (respectively), which specified the basis for its 
decision. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence), D 
(Sexual Behavior), G (Alcohol Consumption) and E (Personal Conduct) of the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).2 The amended SOR deleted the allegations under 
Guidelines B and D, and replaced, amended, and added allegations under Guideline E. 
The amended SOR was admitted as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, and Applicant’s answer to 
the amended SOR was admitted as HE 2. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on February 1, 2011, and to the 
amended SOR on March 15, 2011. He requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 17, 2011. It 
was reassigned to me on April 29, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 25, 
2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 11, 2011. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified, and he presented exhibits (AE) A through P, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 19, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the allegations under the SOR and the amended SOR. After 
a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s 
demeanor and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old engineer working for a Government contractor. He 
graduated from high school and enlisted in the U.S. Army where he served on active 
duty from May 1980 until January 1990. He achieved the rank of staff sergeant, and his 
service was characterized as honorable. Since his discharge from the service, Applicant 
has been consistently employed with numerous Government contractors. He was 
granted access to classified information at the secret and top secret levels while serving 
in the Army. His access was continued during his employment with Government 
contractors until around August 2006, when it was suspended pending the resolution of 
the allegations in the current SOR. There is no evidence showing that Applicant 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
Applicant presented numerous reference letters from supervisors, coworkers, 
and friends. He is considered to be an honest, dependable, and dedicated employee. 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Because of his technical knowledge, professional acumen, and outstanding leadership 
and motivational skills, he is the go-to person in his company. According to his 
references he is trustworthy and has displayed unquestionable integrity and honesty. 
He has been consistently evaluated as exceeding expectations and a solid performer. 
He is an extremely valuable employee. His supervisors endorsed his eligibility for a 
security clearance. 
 
Applicant married his wife in 1981, and they were divorced in 2007. He has two 
grown children of this marriage, ages 28 and 23. He attended college and received his 
bachelor’s degree in business in 2001, and he completed his master’s degree in 
international business management in 2003.  
 
Applicant started consuming alcoholic beverages at age 12 in 1975. He obtained 
beer from his father and drank three to four beers, approximately three to four times a 
year. His alcohol consumption increased when he joined the Army at age 17. He would 
drink approximately four beers two to three times a week. He drank to the point of 
intoxication about once every three months.  
 
Between 1983 and 1986, while serving in the Army, Applicant received alcohol 
treatment for approximately six months. His wife believed he was drinking too much and 
asked him to attend the alcohol counseling. Applicant claimed he changed his attitude 
towards his alcohol consumption and drank less. In 1994, Applicant drove his car under 
the influence of alcohol. He was charged with driving under the influence (DUI), and 
pled guilty to the reduced charge of reckless driving. Applicant failed to disclose this 
alcohol-related incident in his 2006 SCA. 
 
From October 1997 until July 2004, Applicant worked for a Government 
contractor in the Far East and possessed access to classified information at the top 
secret level. In May 1998, while vacationing in the United States, he was convicted of 
operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol. He was ordered to complete an 
alcohol abuse education or treatment program. Applicant failed to disclose this alcohol-
related incident in his 2006 SCA. In August 2000, he was charged with DUI while 
vacationing in the United States. In October 2001, he was convicted of the 2000 DUI 
charge and sentenced, in part, to serve three days in jail. In November 2001, Applicant 
provided a sworn statement indicating he joined Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) in 
November 2000, and that he had been alcohol abstinent for over one year. At his 
hearing, Applicant claimed he was sober from around August 2000 until sometime in 
late 2003. He also averred that he voluntarily attended AA meetings on-and-off from 
2001 until 2003, because he realized he drank more than most people and he 
considered his drinking habits were not normal.  
 
Applicant resumed his alcohol consumption in late 2003. He explained he was 
bored and having marital problems. He started visiting bars on a weekly basis, drinking 
alcohol, playing pool, and consorting with prostitutes. He explained he paid the bar 
owner a fee, from $100 to $300, to be allowed to take the bar girls out of the bar, and he 
paid the girls for their sexual services. He took an unrecalled number of girls out of the 
 
4 
 
 
bars, approximately once every two weeks on the average. He developed a close 
personal relationship with a prostitute from Kyrghstan (A). Applicant took A out of the 
bar approximately six times to have paid sex with her, and he also had consensual sex 
with her numerous times. His relationship continued until he left the Far East in July 
2004. However, he continued his contact with A. In 2005-2006, A asked Applicant for 
money and he sent her $100. In 2006-2007, Applicant gave her $900 after she asked 
for the money. (GEs 4 and 5) 
 
In January 2004, while visiting the bars, Applicant became acquainted with a Far 
East business man (K). Applicant believed K was involved in organized crime and that K 
provided protection for prostitution, bars, and illegal drug activities. Applicant assisted K 
to establish a money laundering scheme.  
 
In August 2006, Applicant was undergoing a contentious divorce. His then wife 
visited his place of employment and threatened Applicant with disclosing to his 
employer his consorting with prostitutes and his money laundering scheme with K. A 
coworker overheard Applicant’s argument with his wife. Applicant became afraid he 
would lose his security clearance and his job if his wife or his coworker disclosed the 
above information. Applicant contacted his facility security officer (FSO) and disclosed 
that he established on-line gold trading accounts for K, through which K was able to 
clean his dirty money. Applicant took a 10 percent cut of the profit. He estimated he 
received $50,000 in six months for his participation in the money laundering scheme. 
After he assisted K on his money laundering scheme, all of Applicant’s and his guests 
bar and prostitute bills were paid by K. Applicant became concerned about his situation 
and in June 2004, he resigned his job and moved back to the United States. Applicant 
claimed his actions were legal, but he believed his behavior was unethical. He claimed 
he has not had any contact with K since he left the Far East in 2004. His disclosure to 
his FSO resulted in a security clearance incident report, and ultimately, in the pending 
SOR. (GE 2) 
 
Applicant was interviewed under oath in February 2007, October 2007, and 
February 2009. In all subsequent interviews, Applicant minimized or contradicted the 
information he provided to his FSO. In February 2007, he denied receiving any cash for 
his assistance to K. He admitted; however, that K paid Applicant’s large bar and 
prostitute bills, which could have totaled a couple of thousand dollars at a time. (GE 4) 
In his October 2007 statement, Applicant admitted he took girls out of the bars on an 
average of twice a week. He claimed; however, that he never engaged in sexual 
activities with any of the girls he took out of the bars. At his hearing, he admitted having 
sexual relations with prostitutes once a month. (Tr. 46) In his February 2009 statement, 
Applicant denied establishing the gold trading accounts for K. He admitted to teaching K 
and his associates to establish the on-line gold trading accounts. After the accounts 
were established, he had his bar and his bar girl services bills paid by K or his 
associates, but denied receiving any cash. 
 
Applicant was required to disclose to his employer, and to the Government, his 
continued contacts and association with the bar girls (prostitutes) and K, because they 
 
5 
 
 
were foreign nationals. Applicant knew of his obligation and deliberately failed to 
disclose his association and contacts with foreign nationals. (GE 4) At the time of his 
association with the foreign nationals, Applicant possessed a top secret security 
clearance.  
 
In January 2007, Applicant was charged with driving while intoxicated. He was 
convicted of the reduced charge of reckless driving and ordered, in part, to attend an 
alcohol treatment/education program for six months. 
 
 In February 2009, Applicant provided a sworn statement to a Government 
investigator in which he stated, in pertinent parts:  
 
 I have never been required to have treatment or counseling for the 
use of alcohol. I do not have an issue with alcohol any longer. I still like to 
drink when I socialize but I drink in moderation. I generally have two drinks 
on Wednesday while socializing with fellow workers and occasionally on 
Friday or Saturday while socializing or at home never having more than 
two or three drinks at one time. No one has suggested that I have an issue 
with my drinking and I have not been in any other trouble regarding my 
drinking since the incident in 2001. . . . I do not have any other adverse 
involvement with law enforcement as a result of my use of alcohol and I do 
not use drugs or have ever used any controlled substance. 
 
 Applicant submitted an SCA in 2006 in which he failed to disclose his 1994 and 
1998 alcohol-related offenses. He explained that he did not disclose his 1994 and 1998 
alcohol-related charges because he did not remember them at the time he completed 
his SCA. He claimed he did not intend to mislead the Government or to falsify his SCA. 
During the February 2009 interview, Applicant was specifically questioned about his 
1994 and 1998 alcohol-related offenses. He did not disclose to the Government 
investigator he was arrested and charged with DUI in 2007, or his subsequent 
conviction for the reduced charge of reckless driving. During his September 2009 
interview with another investigator, Applicant claimed that he did not disclose his 2007 
alcohol-related charge during his February 2009 interview because he forgot about it. At 
his hearing, Applicant claimed he discussed the 2007 alcohol-related event with the 
investigator, and that the investigator forgot to include it. (Tr. 75)  
 
In February 2011, Applicant underwent a psychological evaluation in preparation 
for his security clearance hearing. (AE K). He denied to the psychologist that he 
engaged in sexual intercourse with prostitutes while in the Far East, and his association 
with “K,” a man Applicant suspected of being connected to organized crime. Applicant 
disclosed to his psychologist that he consumed alcohol from 1975 until 2009, his four 
alcohol-related incidents with the law, and his participation in several alcohol-related 
treatments and counseling programs. He also indicated his intention to never consume 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
alcohol again. Applicant also disclosed his experimentation with illegal drugs as a 
youth.3 
 
Applicant was diagnosed with “305.00 Alcohol Abuse r/o 296.43 Bipolar 
Disorder.” The psychologist recommended Applicant continue his substance abuse 
treatment, and that he maintain his alcohol abstinence. The psychologist opined that his 
diagnostic testing did not disclose any cognitive or personality factors that would 
preclude Applicant’s access to classified information. At his hearing, Applicant stated 
that he has had problems with alcohol most of his life He claimed he has been alcohol 
abstinent since his 2007 DUI charge, and that he intends to remain abstinent. He also 
claimed he did not know what K did for a living. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
 
3 Applicant explained he never disclosed in prior SCAs or during background interviews his illegal 
use of drugs as a youth because he forgot about it. When asked why he stated in his February 2009 
interview that he had never used illegal drugs, Applicant again indicated that he had forgotten about it. 
(Tr. 80) 
 
7 
 
 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  From October 1997 until July 2004, Applicant, a married man, worked for a 
Government contractor in the Far East and possessed access to classified information 
at the top secret level. From 2003 until at least July 2004, on multiple occasions he 
engaged in sexual activity with prostitutes. He also associated with a foreign national 
business man whom he believed was connected to organized crime and provided 
protection for prostitutes and illegal drug trafficking activities. Applicant assisted the 
 
8 
 
 
foreign national to establish a money laundering scheme. In exchange for his 
assistance, Applicant accepted a percentage of the money laundered or accepted 
gratuities of around $50,000. For approximately six months, Applicant’s and his friends’ 
bar and prostitute bills were paid by the foreign national. Applicant was required to 
disclose his contact and association with foreign persons. He deliberately failed to 
disclose his contact and association with foreign prostitutes and the foreign national 
business man. 
 
  In August 2006, Applicant was afraid that either his then wife or a coworker 
would disclose to his employer his association with foreign prostitutes and his money 
laundering scheme with the foreign national business man. He disclosed to his FSO his 
contact with prostitutes, his association with the foreign national business man, his 
money laundering scheme, and his acceptance of gratuities in return for setting up the 
money laundering scheme.  
 
  Applicant deliberately falsified his 2006 SCA when he failed to disclose his 1994 
and 1998 alcohol-related charges and convictions. In October 2007, Applicant 
deliberately falsified material facts in an interview with a Government investigator when 
he stated that he never had sexual relations with any of the bar girls he took out. He 
also deliberately falsified material facts in his February 2009 statement when he failed 
to disclose his 2007 alcohol-related charge and conviction, and when he stated he had 
no other adverse involvement with law enforcement as a result of his use of alcohol. 
 
  Applicant claimed that his failure to disclose his alcohol-related charges and 
convictions in his SCA was not deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the 
Government, and that it was an innocent mistake. Concerning his statement that he 
never had sexual relations with the bar girls he took out, Applicant claimed the 
investigator either misunderstood his statements or confused him with another 
applicant. He also claimed that he forgot his 2007 alcohol-related offense and did not 
disclose it. Considering his age, maturity, experience working for the Army and 
Government contractors, his experience with the security clearance process, his 
contradictory statements, and his demeanor while testifying, I find Applicant’s claims of 
innocent mistake not credible.  
 
  Applicant’s overall questionable behavior triggers the applicability of the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
9 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 
10 
 
 
f candor.  
                                           
  After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none apply. Applicant 
falsified his 2006 SCA, made false statements to Government investigators, repeatedly 
minimized his questionable behavior, and contradicted his prior statements. His 
falsifications are serious, recent offenses (felony level).4 He made no effort to correct 
his falsifications until he was questioned by Government investigator about his 
omissions. Moreover, Applicant’s sexual encounters with foreign prostitutes and his 
questionable association with a foreign business man placed him in a position 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. His behavior shows questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and lack o
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the Government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline G by showing that 
Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times to excess, from around 1975 until at least 
2009. He was convicted of four alcohol-related offenses, including two DUIs. Applicant 
exercised questionable judgment by driving after consuming alcohol. Moreover, his 
alcohol-related behavior led to his association with foreign prostitutes and a shady 
business man.  
 
Applicant continued to consume alcohol after completing several substance 
abuse counseling or treatment programs. He was diagnosed with alcohol abuse in 
February 2011. At his hearing, he claimed he had been abstinent since 2007, and that 
he is attending AA meetings. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s falsification of his SCA, his 
false statements to Government investigators, his contradictory statements, and his 
demeanor while testifying provide little credibility to his claims of abstinence and 
continued participation in alcohol counseling programs. 
 
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;” and 
AG ¶ 22(c): “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent;” apply.  
 
  There are four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
4 See 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
 
11 
 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  Considering the record as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline G mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times to the point of intoxication 
from 1975 to at least 2009. He participated in substance abuse counseling several 
times, and committed four alcohol-related offenses. Because of his continued use of 
alcohol after his participation in several treatment programs and his lack of honesty in 
disclosing his alcohol-related behavior, I find that not enough time has passed for me to 
conclude that his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. His past questionable 
behavior still casts serious doubts on Applicant’s reliability and judgment. 
 
  Applicant did not establish he is meaningfully participating in any counseling or 
aftercare treatment program. His actions so far do not convince me that he has fully 
acknowledged his alcohol-related problems. Moreover, in light of his recent diagnosis, 
age, history of using alcohol, and the recency of his questionable behavior, Applicant’s 
promise to drink responsibly and to participate in alcohol treatment or counseling 
without corroboration is not sufficient to show that his questionable behavior is unlikely 
to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
12 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis.  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served 10 years in the 
Army and has worked for Government contractors since. He is considered to be a highly 
valuable, skilled, and productive employee. These factors show responsibility, 
dedication, and some mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, the factors weighting against the granting of his security 
clearance are more substantial. On balance, I conclude that Applicant’s favorable 
evidence is insufficient to mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol 
consumption and personal conduct. Applicant’s failure to disclose his association with 
foreign prostitutes and a foreign shady business man, his actions in establishing a 
money laundering scheme, and his deliberate falsifications and false statements, create 
serious doubts of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    WITHDRAWN 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    WITHDRAWN 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 4.a – 4.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
