1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-07979
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant owes approximately $50,000 in delinquent federal and state income
taxes. Although he recently retained a tax consultant to help him implement a payment
plan, this is insufficient to mitigate the security concern in light of the amount that is
delinquent and the length of time the delinquencies have been outstanding. Clearance
is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On April 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on December
1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2010, admitting the allegations and
requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 18, 2011. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on July 7, 2011, scheduling the case for August 2, 2011. I held the
hearing as scheduled.
At the hearing, I received  six Government exhibits, admitted as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant testified and submitted one exhibit. (AE A). At the
close of the hearing, I left the record open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits.
Within the time allotted, he submitted one additional exhibit marked as AE B. DOHA
received the transcript (Tr.) on August 9, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old single man with two children, ages 19 and 12. His 19-
year-old son lives with him. A prior marriage ended in divorce approximately 20 years
ago. He pays child support for his 12-year-old daughter.
Applicant graduated from college in 1982 with a bachelor of science degree in
computer science. (Tr. 25) Since then, he has been working in the information
technology field. He was unemployed for approximately one month in 2008. (Tr. 27) For
the past three years, Applicant has worked for a defense contractor. His duties include,
among other things, maintaining the human resources computer system. (Tr. 24)
Applicant owes approximately $50,000 of delinquent federal and state income
taxes from tax years in the early 1990s to tax year 2009. In the 1990s, he filed his
income tax returns, but did not pay the taxes due. From 2003 to 2009, he  neither filed
his income tax returns nor paid his income taxes. (Tr. 33) 
Applicant’s tax problems began in 1990 after taking a job as an independent
contractor. His taxes were not deducted automatically from his pay, and he did not set
any money aside in an escrow account for prospective taxes due. Consequently, he
was unable to pay the tax bill when due. (Tr. 21)
Applicant made a payment arrangement with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service
to pay his back federal income taxes at some time in the early 1990s. (Tr. 35) He
adhered to the plan for approximately one year, but quit complying with it before he had
finished paying the tax delinquency. Applied acknowledged that he had “no excuse” for
not paying his income taxes. (Tr. 34)
In April 2011, Applicant retained a tax consultant to help him negotiate a payment
plan for his delinquent taxes and file his delinquent tax returns. (AE B) Per the plan,
Applicant, beginning in April 2011, paid the consultant a fee of $6,350 in monthly
increments to resolve his tax problems for tax years 2003 to 2009. Applicant completed
paying the consultant fee on August 13, 2011, nearly two weeks after the hearing. (AE
B at 12) Under the agreement, the consultant will now file the tax returns, begin
negotiating offers in compromise, and develop a payment plan for Applicant. The
3
installment agreement only covers one of the outstanding tax liens listed in the SOR.
(subparagraph 1.d - 2005 state tax lien for $7,418–AE B at 13) The other tax liens
remain unaddressed. 
The SOR also alleges a cell phone debt for $2,640 (subparagraph 1.e) and a
debt to a bank for $747 (subparagraph 1.f) Applicant disputes the cell phone bill,
arguing that he didn’t know “how that stuff got on” his bill. (Tr. 37) He provided no
records of attempts to dispute or resolve the debt. (Tr. 37) 
Subparagraph 1.f stems from a bounced check. (Tr. 38) He has not paid it.
Applicant maintains a budget. (GE 2) He has approximately $1,800 of monthly
after-expense income and $5,000 saved in a 401k plan. (Tr. 48)
  
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel  . . . ”. The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Over the past 20 years, Applicant has accrued multiple delinquencies, including
approximately $50,000 of back taxes. At or about the time of the SOR’s issuance,
Applicant had not filed his federal or state income tax returns from tax years 2003 to
4
2009. AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” and 19(g) “failure to file Federal, state, or local income
tax returns as required or fraudulent filing of the same,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
All of Applicant’s SOR delinquencies remain outstanding, and he may possibly
owe back taxes for tax years 2006 to 2009. AG ¶ 20(a) is inapplicable. 
Although Applicant was briefly unemployed, this has no bearing on the accrual of
the majority of his delinquent debts because the unemployment was in 2008, nearly 18
years after he first failed to pay his income taxes. Moreover, he was only unemployed
for one month. Most importantly, Applicant testified that he had no excuse for not either
filing or paying his income taxes. AG ¶ 20(b) is inapplicable.
Applicant has retained a tax consultant to develop a payment plan for his income
taxes. As of the hearing date, the plan was still being developed. Also, Applicant had
initiated a payment plan in the 1990s, when he first experienced trouble paying his
income taxes, and failed to adhere to it. Moreover, Applicant provided no plan to pay the
bank debt listed in subparagraph 1.f. Under these circumstances, I cannot conclude that
Applicant has his finances under control. I conclude Applicant’s retention of a tax
advisor is sufficient for AG ¶ 20(d) to apply, but it is too soon to conclude that AG ¶¶
20(c) applies. 
5
AG ¶ 20(e) is potentially applicable to the cell phone debt Applicant disputes. He
neither provided evidence that he  informed the cell phone company of the dispute nor
provided evidence substantiating the basis of the dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.
 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.   
Applicant has either not filed his income tax returns and/or not paid his income
taxes nearly every year for the past 20 years. No circumstances beyond his control
contributed to this problem. It was solely caused by his irresponsibility. 
Applicant retained a tax consultant, but thus far, has neither developed a
payment plan, nor started making any payments toward the satisfaction of these debts. I
am not persuaded that he will adhere to this plan once implemented, in light of his
failure to adhere to a similar plan approximately 15 years ago. Upon considering this
case in the context of the whole-person concept, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate
the security concern.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
