                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02110 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations, J, Criminal Conduct, and E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F, J, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2011. DOHA issued 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
a Notice of Hearing on April 19, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 26, 
2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into 
evidence without objections. Applicant did not offer any documents. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 During the hearing, it became known that Applicant had at one time worked at 
DOHA as a contractor. I did not recognize Applicant until this fact was disclosed. At that 
point, Applicant confirmed that he had had interactions with me when he worked at 
DOHA. I advised Applicant that I remembered him and did not recall any negative 
contact. To the contrary, I remembered him as being helpful. However, I advised him 
that, upon his request, I would recuse myself from the proceeding, and another 
administrative judge would be detailed to his case. I told him that there would be no 
negative implication if he chose to have another administrative judge. I advised him that 
this was his right. Applicant chose to waive his rights and elected to have me continue 
with the case. I granted his request.1   
 
 Department Counsel withdrew SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR except ¶¶ 1.f and 1.k. I 
incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 42 years old. He was married in 1994 and his marriage was voided 
in 2004. When he filed for divorce he learned his wife had not been legally divorced 
from her first husband. Applicant was unaware of this when they married. She had five 
children when they married. Together they have a 10-year-old son and a 16-year-old 
daughter. Applicant has custody of his two children. He had custody of one of his 
stepchildren until 2008. Applicant served in the Army from 1989 to 1999. He was 
honorably discharged.2  
 
 Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in about 2000. In 
approximately 2003 he began using cocaine. He obtained the cocaine from friends. He 
was going through a divorce at the time and was not able to see his children. He used 
cocaine, on the weekends, to manage his stress. At the time, he was working as a 
contractor for the federal government. He used cocaine four to five times a month from 
about 2003 until he was arrested in October 2006. He did not use any other types of 
illegal drugs.3  
1 Tr. 60-66. 
 
2 Tr. 24, 28-29. 
 
3 Tr. 25, 29-43. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 In October 2006, Applicant’s friend wanted to buy cocaine. He and his friend had 
used cocaine together in the past. He asked Applicant if he could buy some cocaine for 
him. Applicant met him at a predetermined location to sell him the drugs. He estimated 
he had approximately 27 grams of cocaine, worth about $600 to $700. In the past, he 
had sold his friend cocaine two or three times. He did not make a profit from the sale. 
Applicant purchased the cocaine from a street seller that he found hanging out in the 
inner city. The drug transaction was arranged by his friend who wanted to buy some 
cocaine. It was actually a law enforcement sting operation. Applicant was arrested and 
charged with three felony counts of manufacture, sale, and possession of a controlled 
substance. Applicant explained that because he had sold cocaine twice, presumably to 
the same friend, he was charged with three counts.4  
 
 Applicant pled guilty to felony possession of a controlled substance and was 
sentenced to six months in jail, suspended, and supervised probation for one year. At 
the suggestion of his attorney, he attended drug counseling and therapy for 12-weeks, 
which he successfully completed. He has not used any illegal drugs since he was 
arrested in October 2006.5  
 
Applicant lost his job because of his arrest and felony conviction. He had been 
working two jobs and earning approximately $85,000. He had been paying his bills until 
he was arrested.6  
 
 In February 2007, Applicant obtained a job paying about $11 to $12 an hour and 
a second part-time job that paid about $9 an hour. In August 2009, he found a better 
job, but was laid-off in February 2011, because the company lost their contract. He 
recently got a job with a federal contractor earning about $51,000. He stated that he told 
his new employer that he had some past issues.7   
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his bills when he lost his job due to his drug arrest 
and conviction. He stated that the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a ($2,606) is the same debt as ¶ 
1.f ($2,394), and SOR ¶ 1.k ($15,424) is a consolidation of the debts in SOR ¶ 1.b and 
¶1.c.8 He did not provide any documentation to verify his assertions. Applicant has 
approximately $70,000 in delinquent debts that he admitted he owes. He disputed about 
$16,000 of delinquent debts as duplicates. He has not paid any of them. He stated he 
filed for bankruptcy on May 7, 2011. He anticipated the debts will be discharged in 
4 Tr. 29-43. 
 
5 Tr. 27, 29-43; GE 3. 
 
6 Tr. 26, 46-48, 52. 
 
7 Tr. 20, 54, 55-59, 72-75. 
 
8 GE 5 verifies the debts Applicant denied.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
bankruptcy in about a month. He completed the mandatory financial counseling required 
when filing for bankruptcy.9  
 
 On September 18, 2009, Applicant completed a security clearance application 
(SCA). Section 23 asked about his use of illegal drugs or drug activity. He admitted his 
prior drug use and listed he used cocaine from October 2005 to October 2006. He did 
not list he used cocaine from at least 2003 to October 2006. When Applicant was 
interviewed by an authorized investigator, he disclosed his drug use was from October 
2005 to September 2006.10  
 
 Applicant attributed the different dates to an honest mistake and 
misunderstanding the question. He stated he initially made a mistake and thought he 
would be able to correct his mistake at his hearing. He disclosed the earlier drug usage 
through interrogatories pertaining to the drug rehabilitation program he completed. In 
those documents, he disclosed his drug use began in 2003 until his arrest in 2006. 
Applicant credibly testified that he was not trying to minimize or hide his drug use from 
the government. I find he did not intentionally or deliberately provide false or misleading 
statements to the government.  
 
 Applicant admitted he used remarkably bad judgment when he used illegal 
drugs. He decided to file for bankruptcy as a way of putting his finances in order. He is a 
hard worker and provides for his family. He is embarrassed and sorry for his past 
conduct, but has to move forward.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
9 Tr. 43-57, 67-68. 
 
10 Tr. 70, 80-99. 
 
11 Tr. 21. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
6 
 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant listed on his SCA that he used cocaine from October 2005 to October 
2006 and while holding a security clearance during that period. It is alleged that 
Applicant deliberately failed to list that he used cocaine from 2003 to at least October 
2006. He provided documents to the government admitting his drug use began in 2003 
and he was not trying to hide the earlier date, but made a mistake. I have considered all 
of the evidence and Applicant’s testimony and find him credible and that he did not 
deliberately misrepresent the period of time he used cocaine. I find for him regarding the 
falsification allegations. Therefore, none of the above disqualifying conditions apply for 
SOR ¶¶ 3.c, 3.d, and 3.e. 
 
Applicant used cocaine while holding a security clearance from at least 2003 until 
he was arrested in October 2006. He was charged with three felony counts of 
manufacture, sale, and possession of a controlled substance. He was found guilty of the 
amended charge of felony possession of a controlled substance. He was sentenced to 
six months in jail, which was suspended, and one year supervised probation. Those 
charges may make him vulnerable if known in the community. I find disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 16(e) applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s felony conviction for possession of cocaine is serious. He regularly 
used cocaine from 2003 to October 2006. He did not stop until he was arrested. During 
that entire time he was entrusted with a security clearance and repeatedly and regularly 
violated that trust. He used the illegal drug because he was going through a stressful 
time in his life. He has completed a drug rehabilitation program. He appears to be 
putting his life back together and no longer using drugs. He acknowledged he made 
serious mistakes. I find AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) partially apply, in that he has taken some 
positive steps to change his past behavior and reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. It is unclear if Applicant still associates with those who use 
drugs. I find that his criminal activity and his association with persons involved in 
criminal activity did not occur under unique circumstances. His drug use, especially 
while holding a security clearance, and his criminal activity casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Considering the length of time that he used 
cocaine while holding a security clearance, I question his willingness to comply with 
rules and regulations. I find AG ¶¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern for criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was arrested in October 2006 and charged with three counts of 
manufacture, sale, and possession of a controlled substance. He pled guilty to an 
amended charge of possession of a controlled substance, a felony. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
8 
 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Applicant pled guilty to felony possession of cocaine. He was caught in a sting 
operation selling cocaine to his friend. He admitted he had done it before. The same 
comments and analysis that were discussed under the Personal Conduct guideline 
mitigating conditions apply under the Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions. Applicant’s 
actions were ongoing and serious. His use of cocaine occurred while he worked as a 
contractor for the federal government and occurred over a three-year period. His actions 
did not happen under unique circumstances and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. There is evidence 
that he is working, taking care of his children, and has completed a drug rehabilitation 
program. He is remorseful and admitted he made a serious mistake. I find AG ¶ 32(d) 
applies.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG & 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has approximately $70,000 in delinquent debt that he admitted he 
owes and is unable to pay. His debts became delinquent when he lost his job in October 
2006 due to his drug arrest and conviction. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
9 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved his delinquent debts. He indicated he filed for 
bankruptcy and anticipated his debts would be discharged. His debts remain current 
because he has not paid or had them discharged. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are the direct result of his criminal conduct. He lost his 
job and ability to pay his debts because he was arrested for selling cocaine to a friend. 
His financial problems are not a result of conditions that were beyond his control. I find 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant did not provide any supporting documents to show 
the current status of his bankruptcy. He did not provide evidence that he has paid any of 
the alleged delinquent debts. The only financial counseling he has participated in was 
through the bankruptcy proceeding. At this time, it is too early to conclude that there are 
clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under control and 
there is insufficient evidence to document that he has made a good-faith effort to pay or 
resolve his obligations. I find AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies and AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
He stated that certain debts alleged were duplicates, but he did not provide any 
supporting documentation to substantiate his dispute or evidence of his actions to 
resolve the issue, which evidence is necessary to trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, J, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant was experiencing stress due to marital problems and a pending divorce. He 
was supporting his children and stepchildren. He began using cocaine due to the stress. 
He regularly used cocaine from 2003 to October 2006. During this time, he held a 
security clearance and was working for a federal contractor. He was arrested in a sting 
operation when he sold cocaine to a friend. He pled guilty to felony possession of 
cocaine and completed the terms of his sentence, including probation and a drug 
rehabilitation program. He lost his job due to his arrest and conviction and was 
subsequently unable to pay his debts. He stated he filed bankruptcy, but it has not been 
completed. Applicant is working again and has custody of his two children. He is putting 
his life back on track. He acknowledged his errors and admitted his mistakes. However, 
Applicant was previously entrusted with a security clearance and for a three-year-period 
he violated that privilege by using cocaine while he was working for a federal contractor. 
Although he is turning his life around and has taken steps to rehabilitate himself, it is not 
enough to mitigate his repeated conduct under the circumstances. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guidelines for Personal Conduct, Criminal Conduct 
and Financial Considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
