                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04595  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on January 12, 2010 to request a security clearance required as part of her 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 6). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On March 9, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; DoD directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. The SOR specified the basis for its 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) of the AG. Applicant answered the SOR on March 21, 2011, but failed 
to indicate if she wished to appear in person or have her case decided on the written 
record. On April 28, 2011, DOHA issued a second letter requesting Applicant to indicate 
which procedure she preferred. She responded on May 11, 2011, and requested a 
decision without a hearing. (Items 1-5) 
 
In her Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted seven allegations, and denied the 
six allegations at SOR subparagraphs ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l. (Item 2) 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)1 in support of the 
Government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request. The FORM was 
forwarded to Applicant on June 21, 2011, and she received it on June 28, 2011. She 
was given 30 days from the date she received the FORM to file a response. Applicant 
timely submitted a one-page response, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2011, for an administrative decision based 
on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s responses to 
the SOR and FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and single. She has a five-year-old son who resides 
with her. She served as an enlisted member of the Air Force from 1998 to 2002. She 
attended college from 2008 to 2009 in a medical assistant program. She has held a 
number of supply positions in private industry since 2002. As of the date of her security 
clearance application in 2009, she was employed by a defense contractor as a supply 
technician. (Item 6) 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts, totaling $19,731, which appear in 
Applicant's January and December 2010 credit reports.2 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 
wage-earner bankruptcy petition in November 2008. The bankruptcy petition lists assets 
of $6,015 and liabilities of $42,631. The wage-earner plan required her to pay $93 per 
week for five years. She noted in her security clearance application that she “started to 
file bankruptcy, but I didn’t go through with it.” Applicant's petition was dismissed in 
January 2009 for failure to make the required payments. Two debts that appear in her 
2008 bankruptcy petition also appear in the current SOR. (Items 4, 7, 11, 12) 
1 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 12 documents (Items 1 - 12) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
2 Applicant denied knowledge of about half of the delinquent debts presented to her at her security 
interview. She had also answered “No” to all financial questions in her security clearance application. 
Falsification of her security clearance application was not alleged in the SOR. Under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence, non-alleged conduct can be considered only under certain circumstances, including the 
whole-person analysis. Here, I will consider it only for that limited purpose. ISCR Case No. 00-0633 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 24, 2003). 
 
3 
 
 
 At her February 2010 security interview, Applicant questioned numerous debts 
that appear in the SOR, stating that she  
 
• did not recognize several debts (¶¶ 1.d, 1.j, and 1.k); 
 
• paid or was paying regularly on other debts (¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, 1.l); and 
 
• disputed the 2008 judgment for a medical debt of $2,988 and a gym membership 
debt of $792 (¶¶ 1.e and 1.f). 
 
Applicant denied responsibility for the medical debt because she was unsure of its 
source. She denied the gym membership debt because she ”dropped the plan” when 
she moved from the area where it was located. However, in her Answer to the SOR, 
she admitted this debt. The file contains no documentation that Applicant has filed 
disputes with the credit reporting agencies. (Items 8, 9) 
 
 Applicant told the security investigator in 2010 that she was delinquent on 
several debts because she was unemployed from July to November 2009. At the time of 
the interview, she believed she was living within her means and able to meet her current 
financial obligations because she “had a better job.” Several months later, in November 
2010, Appellant answered the DOHA interrogatory. She noted that, “I am going to 
[name] credit repair so they can help me clear my credit.” It is unclear whether her 
statement meant that she was already receiving such help or that she intended to 
contact the company in the future. However, the file contains no documentation 
indicating that she has retained a credit counseling service, or that a credit counseling 
agency has performed any debt-resolution services for her. In her response to the 
FORM, Applicant stated that she was young when many of her problems arose. She 
noted that she “wasn’t that good with finances, but I have grown and learned for [sic] my 
past mistakes.” (Items 8, 9, 11, 12; AE A) 
 
 The latest credit report in the file, dated December 2010, lists only three 
delinquent debts, of the 11 in the SOR. I cannot determine from the record evidence 
why the remaining SOR debts do not appear. Although Applicant claimed that she paid 
the debt at allegation 1.l, and was paying on the debts at 1.g and 1.i, she provided no 
documentation to support her claim. Even if her statements are accepted, these debts 
would appear on her report as “Paid” or “Paying as Agreed.” (Item 12)  
 
 The SOR lists the following delinquent debts (Items 11, 12): 
 
• Communications, $413 (allegation 1.b) 
 
• Medical, four debts totaling $3,695 (allegations 1c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i) 
 
• School, $92 (allegation 1.d) 
 
• Gym membership, $792 (120 days past due), (allegation 1.f) 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
• Auto loan, $13,579 (allegation 1.h) 
 
• Other, $400 (allegation 1.j) 
 
• Payday loan, $670 (allegation 1.k) 
 
• Insurance, $90 (allegation 1.l) 
 
 Applicant’s November 2010 personal financial statement shows net monthly 
income of $2,944 and expenses of $1,075, leaving a monthly remainder of $1,869. She 
did not list monthly payments on any of the SOR debts. The file provides no information 
on whether these numbers accurately reflect Applicant's current finances. (Items 4, 6, 7)  
 
 Applicant admits that on May 5, 2002, while on active duty in the Air Force, she 
was arrested and charged with six counts of a misdemeanor: Deposit Account 
Fraud/Bad Checks, $499 or Less. On July 2, 2002, she was convicted in a state court 
and fined $175. Shortly thereafter, Applicant received a General Discharge under 
Honorable Conditions from the Air Force. The file contains no further details regarding 
this conviction. (Items 4, 6, 10) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. She initiated a bankruptcy petition in 
2008, when her liabilities surpassed her assets by $36,616. The reasons for her 
indebtedness are not evident from the evidence, although Applicant states that she did 
not have a clear understanding of how to manage her finances in the past. Her history 
of failing to meet her financial obligations supports application of disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions can potentially mitigate security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay her debts did not occur in the distant past, because her 
debts are still delinquent. She has not shown that her debts will be resolved, or that her 
delinquencies will not continue in the future. Her unresolved financial situation casts 
doubt on her reliability, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 Applicant stated her financial problems stem from unemployment. However, it 
lasted only four months, and it occurred in 2009, after she had become so overextended 
that she filed for bankruptcy. The file contains no evidence of other circumstances that 
might have prevented her from being able to resolve her current situation. Therefore, I 
have no way to determine if unexpected conditions or circumstances beyond Applicant's 
control contributed to her indebtedness. AG ¶ 20(b) is not relevant to the available facts. 
 
 Applicant indicated that she wishes to pay her debts by retaining a credit 
counseling agency. However, she provided no evidence that she has retained one, set 
up payment plans, or paid debts through the company she named. She claimed to be 
paying one debt, and to have paid another, but provided no documentary evidence. In 
addition, although she disputed two debts, Applicant did not provide evidence that she 
informed the credit reporting agencies of these disputes. I cannot conclude that 
Applicant has paid any past-due debts, including the three small debts of less than 
$100. Her debts remain unpaid, with no plan in place to resolve them. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d), 
and (e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and presumed to be a mature adult. She accrued 
significant debt that led to an attempt to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in 2008. 
She has been aware that delinquent debts are a security concern since she completed 
her security clearance application in January 2010. However, the record indicates that, 
over the past one-and-one-half years, she has made no effort to resolve these debts. 
Moreover, although she had delinquent debts when she completed her security 
clearance application, she failed to disclose them to the Government. Applicant's failure 
to be candid in a security clearance application undermines her credibility. A fair and 
common-sense assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance shows she has not demonstrated the good judgment 
and trustworthiness required in those who protect the Government’s interests. Because 
protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts 
must be resolved in favor of the Government.7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
