 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
   
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07570                                  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on March 18, 2010. On May 5, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On June 15, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2011. 
On July 27, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for 
August 10, 2011. On that date, I convened a hearing to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced seven exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 7 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant called 
one witness, testified, and introduced ten exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A through 
Ex. J and entered in the record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I 
agreed to leave the record open for one calendar week, until close of business August 
17, 2011, so that Applicant could, if she wished, provide additional information for the 
record. Applicant timely offered eight additional exhibits, which were marked as Ex. K 
through R and entered in the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) of the hearing on August 15, 2011. 
 
                                        Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted three allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., and 1.g.), and she denied the 
allegations at ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.h. Applicant’s admissions are included as 
findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old, never married, and the mother of an adult child. She 
has a high school diploma. She has held a security clearance for approximately 11 
years. From April 2000 until June 2008, Applicant was employed by a federal contractor 
as a security guard. When she failed to pass a test required as a condition of her 
employment, Applicant resigned because she feared she might be terminated. She then 
worked from June 2008 until March 2009 as a stock clerk in a large retail store. She 
also had a seasonal part-time job. In March 2009, she accepted a position as a security 
guard with her current employer. She now seeks renewal of her security clearance. (Ex. 
1; Tr. 53-54, 59-60.) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant sold a home she had owned for five years and purchased 
another home for approximately $180,000. In January 2008, Applicant refinanced her 
home and assumed a new mortgage for $222,000. Her monthly payment on her 
refinanced mortgage was $1,762. (Ex. 2 at 4; Tr. 53-58.) 
 
 After resigning from her job as a security guard in June 2008, Applicant began to 
experience financial difficulties.  She did not earn enough from her job as a stock clerk 
to pay her monthly mortgage. She made partial payments for a time, but the mortgage 
loan went into default in 2009. Eventually, the property went into foreclosure. In 
December 2010, the bank holding Applicant’s mortgage accepted a short-sale price of 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
approximately $133,000 for the property. The bank lost between $90,000 and $100,000 
on its mortgage loan to Applicant. (Ex. 6; Tr.54-59.) 
 
 Applicant opened a credit card account in January 2006. She used the credit 
card to pay her mortgage and to make car payments. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that the 
account was charged off and that Applicant owed a delinquent debt of $5,207 to the 
credit card company. Applicant admitted the debt. She stated that in July 2011, she 
made an oral agreement with the credit card company to pay $100 a month on the debt. 
She provided documentation that on July 17, 2011, the credit card company had 
deposited the $100 check she submitted on July 15, 2011, in partial payment of her 
debt. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Ex. J; Tr. 64-67.)   
 
 In November 2008, while working as a stock clerk at the retail store, Applicant 
took out a loan for approximately $46,000 and purchased a new automobile. Her 
monthly payments for the loan on the vehicle were approximately $800. Applicant made 
payments on the vehicle until about January 2010; thereafter, she relinquished the 
vehicle in a voluntary repossession. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant owes a 
loan balance of approximately $25,115 on the debt. Applicant admitted the debt but 
requested an accounting from the creditor. The creditor investigated Applicant’s request 
and informed her that the amount of the debt was accurate. At her hearing, Applicant 
asserted that she had an oral agreement with the creditor to pay $100 a month on the 
debt. She provided documentation establishing that on July 15, 2011, she had tendered 
a check for $100 to the creditor, and the creditor had presented the check for payment 
on July 20, 2011. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Ex. I; Ex. Q; Tr. 67-71, 94.) 
 
 Also in November 2008, Applicant took out a loan for approximately $30,000 to 
purchase an automobile for a person with whom she had a romantic relationship. 
Applicant took financial responsibility for the loan because her significant other had poor 
credit and could not obtain a loan. Applicant and her significant other ended their 
romantic relationship but agreed that he would make the monthly payments of $500 on 
the automobile loan, and he did so until March 2010. In April 2010, he was laid off from 
his job.1 He relinquished the automobile in a voluntary repossession. The SOR alleges 
at ¶ 1.g. that Applicant owes a balance on the loan of $16,957. While Applicant admits 
the debt and asserts that she has requested an accounting from the creditor, her letter 
requesting an accounting does not reference the account identified with the debt 
specified in SOR ¶ 1.g. The debt remains unsatisfied. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Ex. R; Tr. 74-79, 
100-109.)      
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant owed a state tax lien of $1,500 entered 
against her in September 2010. Applicant claimed that the lien had been satisfied from 
proceeds she received from the short sale of her home and from her federal and state 
income tax refunds captured by the state. She provided documentation to corroborate 
her claim that the tax lien had been satisfied. (Ex. B; Ex. C; Tr. 56-57, 62.) 
 
 
1This individual appeared as a witness and stated that he remains unemployed. (Tr. 108.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant owed $353 on an account placed for 
collection, and the debt had not been satisfied. Applicant claimed that the debt had 
been settled for $176.45, and she provided documentation to corroborate her claim. 
(Ex. D; Ex. O; Tr. 62-64, 84-85.)    
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant owed a $1,773 delinquent debt, in 
collection status, to a creditor. Applicant claimed she had settled the debt for $625.59 in 
June 2011, and she provided documentation to corroborate her claim. (Ex. E; Tr. 79-
81.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.f. that Applicant owed a $226 delinquent debt, in 
charged-off status, to a creditor. Applicant claimed that she had settled the debt for 
$181.59 in June 2011, and she provided documentation to corroborate her claim. (Ex. 
F; Ex. P; Tr. 81-84.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the $500 debt alleged at ¶ 1.h. and 
stated that she had disputed the debt. At her hearing, she admitted the debt, stated that 
she no longer disputed it, and acknowledged that it remained unsatisfied. (Tr. 71-74.)   
 
 Applicant’s yearly gross salary is about $36,000. Her monthly net salary is 
approximately $2,500.2 She estimated her monthly expenses as follows: rent: $1,0983; 
food and groceries: $100; car payment: $551; cable: $65; cell phone: $50; gasoline: 
$70; automobile insurance: $192; renter’s insurance: $30; and credit disputing service: 
$99. Applicant’s fixed monthly expenses total approximately $2,255, leaving her with a 
net monthly remainder of $246. (Tr. 43-47, 51, 99.) 
 
 Applicant has no active credit cards. She estimated that she has between $100 
and $200 each month to use to pay her delinquent debts. The record does not reflect 
that Applicant has had financial counseling. (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 In July 2011, Applicant purchased a new 2011 automobile. In order to purchase 
the vehicle, she took out a loan for $28,000. Her monthly payment on her automobile 
loan is $551 and is included in her list of fixed monthly expenses. (Tr. 88-89.)   
 
 Applicant’s current site supervisor provided a letter of character reference. The 
supervisor stated that Applicant reported for work in advance of her scheduled tour of 
duty and performed her assignments adequately. Her former site supervisor also   
provided a letter of character reference. He stated that Applicant did an exceptional job, 
was an excellent communicator, and was very dependable. (Ex. G; Ex. H.)   
 
 
 
 
2 Applicant stated that her take-home pay “is around about $1,200 or $1,300 every two weeks.” (Tr. 43.) 
 
3 Applicant stated that her monthly gas, electricity and water charges were included in her rent. (Tr. 45.) 
 
5 
 
 
                                                Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
6 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
  
                                               Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.   
 
After resigning from her position in 2008, Applicant took out consumer loans to 
purchase vehicles for herself and her significant other. She accumulated substantial 
delinquent debt. She was unwilling or unable to satisfy her creditors. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. If the 
financially delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might 
apply.  If “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply.  If “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply.  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
The record shows that Applicant’s financial delinquencies resulted in part when 
she voluntarily resigned from her position as a security guard in 2008, took a job as a 
stock clerk in a retail store, and found she lacked sufficient financial resources to pay 
her debts. Applicant has been steadily employed at her current job since March 2009, 
and yet her financial delinquencies continue. Applicant’s current financial delinquencies 
involve substantial sums of money, occurred under circumstances that are likely to 
recur, and cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for eight delinquent debts. To her 
credit, Applicant provided documentation to show that she had settled or otherwise 
satisfied four of the debts alleged on the SOR. Those four debts, alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.a., 1.b., 1.e., and 1.f., total approximately $3,852. However, four additional debts, 
alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.g., and 1.h., total approximately $47,779 and remain 
unresolved. Applicant claimed she had oral agreements with the creditors at SOR ¶¶ 
1.c. and 1.d. to make $100 payments on each debt every month, and she provided 
documentation showing she had sent each creditor an initial payment of $100 in July 
2011, approximately one month before her hearing. The financial summary she 
provided at her hearing indicated that she had a monthly remainder of approximately 
$246. She stated that she had between $100 and $200 each month to pay her 
delinquent debts.  
 
However, in July 2011, Applicant assumed an additional financial obligation when 
she took out a $28,000 loan to purchase a new 2011 vehicle. Her financial summary 
shows that expenses associated with the new vehicle total over $800 each month. 
While Applicant’s intention to satisfy her creditors is laudable, she has failed to 
demonstrate a track record of financial responsibility. She has not yet demonstrated 
priorities that emphasize paying her existing debts and avoiding additional financial 
delinquencies in the future. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) do not apply to 
the facts of Applicant’s case. Further, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part to the 
facts of Applicant’s case.4  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
4 ¶ 20(e) is not raised by the facts of this case. 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when she was a mature adult. She provided 
documentation establishing that she had paid or settled four of her delinquent debts. 
However, she has not taken any action to address the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.h. In 
July 2011, over two months after receiving the SOR, she sent payments of $100 to the 
creditors identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d., raising a concern about her motivation, her 
intent to make good-faith efforts to resolve those overdue debts, and her ability to avoid 
recurrence of financial delinquency in the future. DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained 
what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’  
 
(Internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 
2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
While Applicant provided documentation to show that four of the eight debts 
alleged on the SOR have been settled or otherwise satisfied, she has failed to 
demonstrate that she has developed a long-term plan to satisfy her creditors and 
understands how to avoid excessive debt in the future. Moreover, she failed to establish 
that she had pursued resolution of her four unresolved debts, totaling $47,779, with 
“reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”     
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
9 
 
 
Accordingly, I conclude, after a careful review of the facts of her case, the financial 
considerations adjudicative guideline, and the whole-person analysis, that Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial delinquencies.  
    
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
            Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:              For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. and 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e. and 1.f.:                    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g. and 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
