 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01219    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows that between 
fall 2006 and fall 2010, Applicant accumulated $52,000 in delinquent debt. He filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in July 2011. Although bankruptcy is a legitimate 
method of resolving delinquent debt, Applicant has not demonstrated a record of 
financial reform and rehabilitation. Accordingly, clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order (EO) and DoD Directive,1 on January 
28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a Statement 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
 
2 
 
of Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual 
basis for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).    
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned 
to another administrative judge in April 2011. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 
2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on July 12, 2011. Department Counsel 
offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I were also admitted without objection.  I received 
the transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has worked 
for the same company for 30 years and has held a security clearance for the majority of 
that time. His most recent periodic reinvestigation revealed, and he admits as alleged in 
the SOR, that he is indebted to ten creditors for approximately $52,000 in delinquent 
debt.2 
 
Applicant has never married and has no children. In late 2006, he became 
friendly with a single mother who lived on his street. When they met, the woman had 
three children between the ages of 6 and 12. Soon, Applicant became emotionally 
attached to them.  Because he believed he was in a romantic relationship with the 
woman, he began to provide financial support to the woman and her children. Initially, 
he gave the woman some money to help her pay her bills.  Initially, he was able to do so 
without any detriment to his personal finances because he earned overtime pay on a 
regular basis.3 
 
In 2008, the woman had a fourth child, Applicant was not the father. Still, he 
continued to financially support the woman and her four children. By 2009, he was 
giving her in excess of $3,000 each month. He paid her rent; he bought clothes and 
electronics for the children, which the family often sold for cash.  He paid $2,000 to bail 
the woman out of jail and allowed her and the children to live in his home while she 
served a sentence on home confinement. To provide this level of support, not only did 
Applicant give the woman his entire paycheck, he also took cash advances on his credit 
card. As his financial support for the woman and her family increased, his income 
steadily decreased due to lack of overtime. By 2009, Applicant’s income decreased so 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case.  The AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H 
(2006). The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
2 Tr. 16-17; Security Clearance Application, dated September 21, 2009. 
 
3 Tr. 16, 20-21, 24-26. 
 
 
3 
 
drastically that he began having difficulty paying his bills and his mortgage became 
delinquent.4 
  
In October 2010, Applicant was paying the rent for the apartment the woman 
lived in with the children. Through neighborhood gossip, he learned that another man 
was living in the apartment. After he confirmed this to be true, Applicant stopped 
providing financial support to the woman.  However, by that time his finances were in 
disarray. Applicant refocused his attention on resolving his delinquent debt.5 
 
 He rehabilitated his mortgage loan through a loan modification program. Unable 
to negotiate settlement agreements with his creditors, Applicant decided to file for 
bankruptcy protection. Although he initially planned to file under Chapter 13, his lawyer 
advised him that Chapter 7 would be the better option. He filed his bankruptcy petition 
on July 11, 2011, the day before the hearing. All of the debts alleged in the SOR are 
included in the bankruptcy petition, which is now pending with the bankruptcy court.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
4 Tr. 21, 27-29, 31-34. 
 
5 Tr. 20, 29-30. 
 
6 AE C – G; Tr. 34-37. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems became acute in 2009 as he continued provide 
financial support for the family of his love interest despite his steady decrease in 
income. As a result, he began to accumulate debt that he could not repay. These facts 
support the application of the disqualifying conditions cited above. 
  
 The woman took advantage of Applicant’s kindness. However, he willfully 
ignored the red flags that were raised repeatedly during their four-year interaction and 
continued to provide financial support for the woman and her four children. The financial 
 
5 
 
problems he now faces are the consequences of that decision. Therefore, none of the 
mitigating conditions potentially available under AG ¶ 207 apply to this case.  
 
 Because Applicant’s financial problems are recent and did not occur under 
unusual circumstances, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Although Applicant could not control 
the decrease in overtime hours available at his company, he did have control over how 
he spent his decreasing income. He chose to provide financial support to his love 
interest and her four children, to his detriment. Accordingly, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
Applicant did not provide any evidence that he has reformed his financial habits. 
Although he has received financial counseling, he only did so as a prerequisite for filing 
his bankruptcy petition. Consequently, AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. He has filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection to resolve his delinquent debt. While bankruptcy is a 
legitimate method of resolving delinquent debt, an applicant must do more than merely 
show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to 
claim the benefit of AG ¶ 20(d).8 
 
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan9 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this 
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, 
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. This case is decided against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
8 ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004)  (citations omitted). 
 
9 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
