                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 10-03300 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
M, Use of Information Technology Systems, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines M and E. On March 2, 2011, DOHA issued an amendment to the SOR 
detailing additional security concerns under Guideline E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the original SOR on November 15, 2010. He requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. He answered the amendment to the SOR on the 
record at his hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2011. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 18, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 23, 
2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant did not object to 
those exhibits and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant and two witnesses 
testified on his behalf. He offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 1, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 2.a, and 2.b. He denied the remaining 
allegations. I incorporated his admissions into my findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He is married and has an eight-year-old son. He has 
worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since June 2009. Prior to his 
present job, he worked for a different federal contractor from January 2003 to March 
2009. He also worked part-time from 2000 to 2006, for a retail store, in their computer 
service department. He has a bachelor’s and master’s degree.1  
 
In 1997, Applicant was working for a government agency and was laid off. He 
was in college at the time. He applied for unemployment insurance. He got a part-time 
job as a bartender. He was required to forecast his earnings and provide them to the 
unemployment agency. He occasionally earned more money than he forecasted 
because he often would not know how many hours he would be assigned to work. He 
did not go back to adjust the amount when he worked more hours than forecasted. He 
was required to report the amount he earned. He was informed by the state 
unemployment agency that he owed money to the state. He made full restitution. He 
was charged criminally with providing false information to the unemployment agency. 
He was represented by an attorney. He went to court and pled no contest to one charge 
of providing false information and the other charge was dismissed. He did not receive 
any jail time or punishment. Applicant did not disclose this offense on his 2002 security 
clearance application. He stated he did not know why he did not list it. He stated he did 
not think about the offense and forgot about it. He indicated he did disclose the offense 
when he was interviewed by an investigator in 2004 or 2005. He did not list the incident 
on his 2007 SCA because it was beyond the seven year time frame.2  
 
 While working part-time for a retail store from 2000 to 2006, Applicant and his 
computer expert colleagues would collaborate with each other and share computer 
applications and best practices in an attempt to arrive at resolutions for customers’ 
computer problems. They would exchange software and information. Applicant stated 
1 Tr. 41-47,108. 
 
2 Tr. 88-102, 109-123. 
 
3 
 
 
he never copied any software from his full-time or part-time employers. He would legally 
download shareware and free software, copy it to a compact disc, and share it with his 
colleagues. Applicant stated he never duplicated copyrighted material from his 
employers.3  
 
Due to his expertise in computers, Applicant’s friends would ask him to build 
computers for them. They would supply him with the hardware and the software. He 
built computers for a few friends from 2001 to 2004. He would install software that was 
given to him by his friends. He did not inquire if the software was obtained legally. He 
admitted that some of the software could have been illegally obtained. When he was 
later polygraphed, he admitted that he thought some of the software might have been 
“hinky” so he disclosed it to the polygraph examiner. He stated he did not question the 
legality of the software unless he did not have “the key” required to open the software. 
He got the “key” from the internet. He stated he found the “key” for the majority of the 
software he was looking for by searching the internet. He admitted he should have 
questioned whether the software was legally obtained. I find Applicant was aware that 
some of the software he used was not legally purchased and he was aware that by 
obtaining the “key” from the internet he was illegally downloading the programs.4  
 
Applicant admitted he copied some DVDs that he rented from Netflix. In his 
answer to the SOR, he stated: 
 
In the fall of 2003, I made copies of at most five DVDs I had rented from 
Netflix. I viewed these copies as backups solely for my personal use and I 
never sold or otherwise distributed them. After thinking more critically 
about my actions, I concluded that copying the rented DVDs was not right. 
I immediately stopped copying all DVDs and subsequently threw out all of 
the copied DVDs I had made.5  
 
He stated at his hearing that the reason he copied the DVDs was because one 
time he had broken a DVD and Netflix made him pay the purchase price for the DVD. 
He then started backing up the DVDs just in case it happened again. He did this prior to 
2004. While working at the retail store in 2004, he learned that copying DVDs was 
illegal. He believed this was based on a new law that was passed in 2004. He never 
copied DVDs after 2004, although his brother continued to do so. He did not tell his 
brother to stop. He admitted to watching the DVDs that his brother copied, but he did 
personally copy any more.6  
 
                                                          
3 Tr.81-88, 128-140. 
 
4 Tr. 77-81, 140-144. 
 
5 Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. 123-128. 
 
4 
 
 
 In October 2004, Applicant admitted to a government investigator that he 
downloaded about 100 to 150 songs to an MP3 player from 1996 to 2002. He said 
about 90% were downloaded before he left college. He was in college from 1991 to 
1999, earning his bachelor’s and master’s degree. He stated this occurred during a time 
when online sharing of music was widespread and the legality of the activity was still 
controversial. When he left school he downloaded about 10 to 20 songs between 1999 
and 2002. When it became clear that this was a violation of copyright laws in 2002, he 
immediately stopped his actions. He has not illegally downloaded any music to MP3 
players or other devices since early 2002.  
 
 Applicant also admitted he disclosed to a government investigator that he copied 
legal MP3 files and CDs to his corporate computer for the purpose of importing them 
into iTunes and listening to them during non-work hours. He stated he never 
downloaded music from the Internet to his corporate computer. He stated the copying of 
music files is not a violation of his employer’s internet policy which prohibits the 
downloading of music files from the internet.7  
 
Applicant admitted he knew he was downloading software that was copyrighted 
and that was not free or a trial version. He would get the key from the Internet, install 
the program, and decide whether to purchase the program. He admitted he wrongfully 
obtained the key to make the program work. Applicant knew he was not authorized to 
use the software and that he was violating the licensing requirement by using an 
unauthorized key he obtained.8 
  
 Applicant admitted that he took a copy of Turbo Tax software that he copied onto 
a compact disk, brought it to work and put it on his work laptop computer. He originally 
obtained the copy of Turbo Tax to use for free for a 30-day trial period. He obtained the 
program from an unofficial Internet site that had a “key” to unlock it. He used it past the 
30-day trial period. He stated that he was deciding whether to buy Turbo Tax or another 
comparable tax software program, so he wanted to check it out. He inserted the 
compact disk into his work laptop computer. His laptop computer automatically scans 
the disk for viruses. He took his work laptop home and estimated the Turbo Tax 
program remained on the computer for a few days. He did not use his personal 
computer to load Turbo Tax because his computer was old and it did not have a lot of 
memory. I find Applicant loaded unauthorized software on his corporate computer 
system.9  
 
 Applicant admitted that he obtained a copy of Norton Utility software from the 
Internet. He brought it to work and used it on his work computer because it had a more 
                                                          
7 Tr. 71. 
 
8 Tr. 128-139. It is unclear exactly what year Applicant downloaded the software, but it appears it was 
prior to his denial of a security clearance by a government agency in March 2006. 
 
9 Tr. 62-68, 150-155; AE C is a statement made by Applicant in March 2006. He admitted to installing an 
unauthorized version of Turbo Tax on his work computer, 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
advanced anti-virus program than the one his employer used. His employer did not 
have Norton Utility. His work computer ran the program from the compact disks he 
inserted into it. He did not think to ask for authorization from his employer to use it on 
his work computer. I find Applicant used unauthorized software on his corporate 
computer system.10  
 
 Applicant stated that his employer’s policy was that employees could use their 
work computer for personal use as long as they adhered to the company’s standards 
and they were not billing their time to a contract. Applicant stated he disclosed the 
above mentioned uses during a polygraph examination. He stated that other employees 
were doing the same thing he was doing. He was never disciplined by his employer. He 
stated an employee did not need authorization from the employer to use work 
computers for personal purposes or to run programs that were not provided by the 
employer. He stated employees were allowed to use other disks as long as they were 
scanned for viruses. He stated they were also allowed to use software not provided by 
the employer, provided it was first scanned.  
 
Applicant admitted to copying other software from the Internet. He did not pay for 
the software, which was required. He would test it on his work computer, so he could 
decide whether or not he wanted to purchase it. He then paid for the software that he 
wanted to retain. He did not pay for the software he decided not to retain. Unlike Turbo 
Tax, these programs did not offer a free trial period. Applicant knew his actions were 
illegal. He admitted what he did was wrong, but stated he purchased some of them 
later. He admitted he needed a special key to access some of the programs to make 
them work. He obtained the key from the Internet to run the programs. He was not 
authorized access to the key.11  
 
In a March 2006 letter appealing the denial of a security clearance by another 
government agency, Applicant stated:  
 
Most of the software I “acquired” by downloading was freeware or trial 
versions that expired after a couple of weeks. The only software that I 
downloaded that were not free or trial versions were Windows XP ($199), 
Windows 98 ($50), Windows 2000 ($120), Norton Antivirus ($29), 
Microsoft Office ($149), Norton Systems Works ($48), Turbo Tax ($30), 
and EZ Creator ($79). At the time of my interview, I stated that this 
software was worth between $2,000 and $3,000. This was an incorrect 
statement. The [actual] value of the software was not more than $705.  
 
In some cases, I used keys available on the [I]nternet to install the 
software. I downloaded this software to test their functionality before 
buying the product. After previewing the software, I purchased the ones 
that I needed (Windows XP, Norton Antivirus, Turbo Tax, and Microsoft 
10 Tr. 68-71, 158-159. 
 
11 Tr. 55-56, 72-77; AE C.  
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Office) and completely uninstalled and erased the others (EZ CD Creator). 
Copies of the receipts for the software I purchased are attached. Looking 
back, I realize now that I should not have used keys obtained from the 
[I]nternet to install the products prior to actually purchasing them.12 
 
 As part of his job, Applicant worked inside a lab with computers. The area did not 
have Internet connectivity. Any research that was conducted had to be completed 
outside of the lab spaces. On occasion, Applicant had to test software that was on the 
network server. He copied the software to his work laptop and tested it to make sure it 
worked. He would then remove it from the work laptop after the testing was complete. 
These tasks were part of his work responsibilities. He stated he did not need 
authorization from his employer to do this testing.13  
 
 The employer’s corporate procedures state: 
 
Prohibited Activities and Conduct 
 
Violations of the rights of any person or company protected by copyright, 
trade secret, patent, or other intellectual property, or similar laws or 
regulations, including, but not limited to, the installation or distribution of 
pirated or other software products that are not appropriately licensed for 
use by [employer]. 
 
Unauthorized copying of copyrighted material including, but not limited to, 
digitization and distribution of photographs from magazines, books or 
other copyrighted software sources; copyrighted music; and the 
installation of any copyrighted software for which [employer] does not 
have an active license.  
 
* * * 
 
Downloading and/or installing any software without authorization, unless it 
is a part of a job requirement. Such action could:  
 
 -infringe intellectual property rights of a third party. 
-introduce vulnerabilities, viruses, and spyware into the company’s 
IT network. 
 -cause operational systems to cease operating correctly. 
 
Files prohibited from Internet downloading are:  
 
 -music 
 -entertainment videos 
12 AE C. 
 
13 Tr. 55-61, 146-150. 
 
7 
 
 
 -games 
 -screen savers 
 
* * * 
 
Data files, such as documents, spreadsheets, presentations, pictures, 
audio, and video, are only permitted for Internet downloading if they: 
 
 -have been checked for viruses. 
 -are business relevant. 
 -do not infringe on copyright laws. 
 -are not otherwise prohibited by this procedure.14  
 
 Applicant installed iTunes on his work computer. He believed he was authorized 
to do so. His employer’s policy prohibited installing the program. He stated he was 
aware he was not authorized to install Turbo Tax, but was unaware of the prohibition 
against iTunes because “everybody in [the company] had the software on their 
computer.”15  
  
                                                          
 In 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He advised the 
investigator that he had been previously denied a security clearance. He testified that 
he told the investigator he did not know the specific reasons why he was denied the 
clearance by another government agency. He told the investigator that he was not 
accused of any wrongdoing and that he was simply told by the agency that he was not a 
good candidate and no further details or explanations were provided to him. He 
appealed the denial and was represented by counsel. He provided a 16-page letter with 
enclosures to the agency in support of his appeal. He told the investigator that he never 
received a final decision on his appeal. At his hearing, he admitted he had received a 
letter from the agency before he was interviewed, advising him of the initial denial, but 
at the time of his interview, he did not recall the reasons for the denial.16  
 
 A letter dated March 10, 2006, to Applicant from the government agency detailed 
the reasons he was denied a security clearance. It stated Applicant’s personal conduct 
was the reason for the denial. It specifically stated Applicant’s disclosure of his criminal 
charge for providing false information to obtain unemployment benefits; his admissions 
to downloading MP3 files and copying DVDs; building computers for friends and 
installing illegally downloaded software; and copying software as the reasons for the 
denial.17 
 
14 Tr. 154-156; AE C, Tab C. 
 
15 Tr. 156-158. 
 
16 Tr. 103-107, 159-174; GE 5, 6, 7. 
 
17 Tr. 51-53; GE 5, 6. 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
When asked why he told the government investigator that he was denied 
program access because he was not a good candidate and failed to disclose the 
content of the denial letter, he stated he could not recall the details of the letter. He 
indicated that his interview statements included in his interrogatory were somehow out 
of context, but he did not correct them when they were provided to him. He did not know 
why he made the statement to the investigator. At his hearing, he admitted he was 
denied a security clearance by the government agency due to personal conduct. 
Applicant’s testimony was not credible. I find he intentionally misled the government 
investigator by providing false information.18 
 
 A former coworker testified on behalf of Applicant. He worked with Applicant 
when they both worked for two different employers in about 2001 through about 2004. 
They have maintained a personal relationship since then, but they no longer work 
together. Their first employment together was for a small company. The witness stated 
there were certain inherent rules for safeguarding data and security within the company. 
When they worked for a larger company, there were written rules. The witness was 
unaware of any infractions committed by Applicant. The witness trusted Applicant and 
was not aware of him being dishonest or breaking rules. He indicated that there was 
annual mandatory security training provided by their employer.19  
 
 Another witness who worked with Applicant in 2004 testified on his behalf. They 
worked together for about 18 months. They maintained a personal relationship after 
they no longer worked together. He could not recall the security rules or information 
technology rules at the company where they worked. He was not aware of Applicant 
committing any infractions. He believes Applicant is trustworthy and dependable. He 
commented that Applicant would remind him to follow certain procedures.20  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a coworker. She has known him since 
1992 when they met at college. They later worked together on two projects, one in 2001 
for about six months and again in 2007 for about 18 months. She believes Applicant to 
be honest, trustworthy, ethical, dependable, add a person of high character. To her 
knowledge, he follows the rules of employment both with regards to internal operations 
and clients. She stated: “[Applicant] told me that the issues identified in the Statement of 
Reasons are behind him and I believe him based on my experiences with him over the 
last several years.”21  
 
 Another character letter was provided from his college roommate. He has known 
Applicant since 1994. He considers Applicant a hard-working and trustworthy person. 
18 Tr. 103-107, 159-174; GE 5, 6, 7. The final denial letter in response to Applicant’s appeal was issued 
on January 10, 2010. 
 
19 Tr. 18-29. 
 
20 Tr. 29-40. 
 
21 AE A. 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
He is punctual and works long hours to fulfill his work obligation. He follows the rules of 
employment. He “previously and presently has access to company proprietary, 
classified or export controlled data under an obligation not to disclose such protected 
information.” He indicated that Applicant follows the rules regarding sensitive, 
proprietary, and classified material.22 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
22 AE B. 
 
10 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find two are potentially applicable: 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
Applicant installed and illegally downloaded software when he built computers for 
his friends. He illegally downloaded software, used it, and purchased it if he decided to 
keep it; otherwise he would remove it from his computer. He did this to screen the 
software and circumvent having to pay for it before he decided he wanted it. He 
downloaded at least two programs (Turbo Tax and Norton Utility) on his work computer 
in violation of company rules. He illegally copied MP3 music files and DVDs. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply to these facts.  
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant removed software from 
his corporate computer without authorization, as alleged in SOR 1.c, or that he copied 
software from two places of employment, as alleged in SOR 1. b.  
 
 
11 
 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and three are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor.  
I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. He is very knowledgeable about 
information technology. He was aware that, absent a manufacturer’s trial offer, he was 
required to pay for software before he used it. I did not find his testimony credible when 
he said he did not know if the software his friends gave him was legally purchased. I 
find he knew that when he had to search for a “key” on the Internet to access the 
software, he knew it was pirated software. Applicant did not have authorization to use 
his work computer to download Turbo Tax so he could test it. He did not have 
authorization to download Norton Utility on a company computer without a license. By 
doing so, he violated his company’s rules. The downloading of music files and copying 
DVDs were minor infractions and based on when they happened, it is possible that 
Applicant did not realize his actions were illegal at that time. However, he has exhibited 
a continuing course of conduct in bypassing and circumventing the rules. His actions 
cast doubt on his trustworthiness and good judgment. His actions were intentional and 
are not considered minor. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern. 
The following is potentially applicable: 
 
12 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, awarded benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or awarded fiduciary responsibilities;  
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
Applicant failed to disclose he was charged with providing false information to 
obtain unemployment benefits. He pled no contest to one charge and paid restitution. I 
find his failure to disclose his criminal offense was not inadvertent, but deliberate. 
Applicant made a false statement to a government investigator during his security 
interview when he stated he was not accused of any wrongdoing or given an 
explanation as to why another government agency denied him a security clearance. 
Applicant’s explanations lacked candor and were not credible. I find he intentionally and 
deliberately provided false information to a government investigator. Applicant illegally 
downloaded software, obtained keys to use the software, used his computer expertise 
to bypass copyright laws, and violated company rules. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and the following 
four are potentially applicable: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
13 
 
 
Applicant was represented by an attorney when he pled no contest for providing 
false information to the unemployment agency. I did not find him credible that he forgot 
about the offense when he failed to disclose it on his security clearance application. 
Applicant’s statement to the government investigator that he was told he was not a good 
candidate for the job and it had nothing to do with any wrongdoing, as the reason he 
was previously denied a security clearance, was a false and misleading statement. 
Applicant was provided a written explanation regarding his wrongful actions as the 
reason he was denied a security clearance. He provided a 16-page appeal to the denial. 
His explanation that he could not recall why he was denied is not believable. I find he 
intentionally and deliberately provided false and misleading information to the 
investigator. Applicant’s conduct exhibits a pattern of untruthfulness and raises serious 
security concerns. My conclusions under Guideline M apply equally under Guideline E, 
regarding Applicant’s personal conduct. Applicant’s repeated serious misconduct casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Although Applicant 
acknowledges some of his behavior was wrong, I did not find his testimony credible, 
and therefore cannot conclude his behavior is unlikely to recur, or that he has reduced 
his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. Therefore, I find none of the 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines M and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is well respected by his community of coworkers. He is intelligent and an 
obvious expert in the field of information technology systems. Early in his career and 
during a time when the computer music business was new and not well regulated, he 
 
14 
 
 
downloaded music that, at that time, he likely did not think he was required to pay for. 
Later, as he became more familiar with the industry, he took advantage of his expertise 
and obtained software and keys to unlock the software without paying for it. He built 
computers for his friends and was aware that some of the software was illegally 
obtained, which required a search of the Internet to find the key to unlock it. It appeared 
to be somewhat common practice to listen to iTunes on his employer’s computer, which 
is a minor infraction. However, he also used software that was not authorized on his 
employer’s computer, in violation of company rules. He circumvented the process for 
purchasing software because he was able to use his expertise to bypass the process. 
Although he later paid for some of the software, it does not negate or minimize his 
violations. Many of these issues were revealed when he was subjected to a polygraph. 
Applicant was denied a security clearance by another agency, which is not a 
disqualifying condition. He appealed the denial, but his false statements to a 
government investigator during his security clearance interview are the cause of 
concern. His past criminal offense for obtaining unemployment benefits is not significant 
by itself, but when considered with the other falsification issues that were raised, and 
the fact that Applicant failed to disclose the offense, it raises security concerns. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Use of Information 
Technology Systems and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c;    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
