1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09145 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 21, 2010, to obtain a security clearance required for employment with a 
defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an 
interrogatory to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in his 
background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant's 
response to the interrogatory, DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance. On March 10, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for drug involvement 
(Guideline H). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
2 
 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 
March 1995 until May 2010 (SOR 1.a), that he used cocaine in 2005 (SOR 1.b), and 
that he tested positive for marijuana in 2002 on a drug test administered for his 
employment (SOR 1.c). Applicant admitted the allegations in his April 29, 2011, 
response to the SOR. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 12, 2011, 
and the case was assigned to me on May 19, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on June 9, 2011, scheduling a hearing for June 20, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government offered two exhibits which were marked and admitted into 
the record without objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 and 2. Applicant 
testified. I kept the record open for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant 
timely submitted three documents I marked and admitted to the record as Applicant 
Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through C. Department Counsel had no objection to admission of 
the document. (Gov. Ex. 3, Memorandum, dated June 24, 2011) DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 28, 2011. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant received the notice of hearing a few days before the hearing. Applicant 
is entitled to 15 days advance notice of a hearing (Directive E3.1.8.). On May 12, 2011, 
Applicant discussed with Department Counsel the hearing date of June 20, 2011. 
Applicant was ready to proceed and had sufficient time to prepare. Applicant 
affirmatively waived the 15-days notice requirement. (Tr. 5-7) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admissions to the SOR allegations under Guideline H are included in 
my findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I 
make the following essential findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old high school graduate who works as an electrician in 
construction. He was married in 1997 but divorced in 2003. He has two children. He is 
seeking a security clearance to work for a defense contractor as an electrician in 
construction overseas. (Tr. 9-10)  
 
 Applicant admits he used marijuana about three to five times a week starting in 
March 1995 when he was 18 years old until May 2009. He curtailed his use after May 
2009 and only used about five times until May 2010 when he stopped using marijuana 
or other drugs. He was working in construction the entire time and used marijuana as a 
sleep aid. Marijuana was easy to find and its use was prevalent in the construction 
trades. He would purchase a “1/4 bag” for $25 and it would last him about two weeks. 
He was randomly drug tested by many of his employers but only tested positive once in 
2002. He was working for an electrical staffing company which did not drug test but was 
tested when he was sent to a unionized job. The other companies that he worked for 
3 
 
drug tested as part of the hiring process. He did not use all of the time and knew he 
would be tested when he went for the interview. He never failed one of these drug tests. 
He did use marijuana after being hired but he was not tested. (Tr. 14-20) 
 
 Applicant admitted he used cocaine one time in 2005 as an experiment. The drug 
was supplied by his then girlfriend. He felt nervous after taking the drug. (Gov. Ex. 2, 
Answer to Interrogatory, Testimonies at 1.) 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant voluntarily submitted for a drug test. The results were 
negative for all drugs tested. (App. Ex. 1 through 3) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Administrative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
4 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, because it may impair judgment and raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are mood and 
behavior altering substances, and include those listed in the Controlled Substances Act 
of 1970. Marijuana and cocaine are listed in the Act. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical 
direction (AG ¶ 24). Applicant admits purchasing and using marijuana from 1995 until 
May 2010, use of cocaine one time in 2005, and failing a drug test in 2002. He stopped 
using marijuana about the same time he submitted his security clearance application. 
Applicant's admitted drug use raises Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
25(a) (any drug use); AG ¶ 25(b) (testing positive for illegal drug use); and AG ¶ 25(c) 
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia). 
 
 The Government produced sufficient evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions as required in AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), and 25(c). The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns 
under drug involvement. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation 
or prove a mitigating condition, and the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the 
Government. Applicant raised conditions that may mitigate the security concern. 
 
 I considered Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated 
intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) disassociation from drug-using 
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation). These mitigating conditions do not 
apply. While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of 
time has passed without evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation 
whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant admits using marijuana for over 15 years from 1995 until 2010. For all 
but the last year, he used marijuana from three to five times a week. In the last year, he 
5 
 
used only about five times. He purchased the marijuana and used it to help him sleep. 
There were no unusual circumstances leading to the drug use. His use started as a 
teenager but he was in his early thirties when he curtailed and stopped using in 
2009/2010. He was employed, married, and the father of two children during the time he 
used marijuana. He stopped using contemporaneous with submitting his security 
clearance application. Applicant’s long and frequent use of marijuana for over 15 years 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant 
experimented with cocaine once in 2005, and failed a drug test for marijuana in 2002. 
His onetime use of cocaine in 2005, and his failed drug test in 2002 no longer create a 
security concern. The behavior was long ago and the cocaine use was infrequent. 
 
 There is no indication that his drug use would not recur. Balanced against his 
long time use of marijuana is Applicant’s abstinence for just one year. The only 
indication of a changed circumstance is that he applied for a security clearance required 
for a desired position with a defense contractor. There are no indications he sought or 
received treatment for his drug use, that he changed associates, or is in a different 
environment. There is limited information about his intent not to use drugs in the future. 
There is only his statement that he will not use. The information is not sufficient to 
overcome his long term use of marijuana. Even though he recently tested negative for 
drugs, Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns for his use of marijuana from 
1995 until 2010. He has not established sufficient changes of circumstance to show he 
has reformed and will no longer use illegal drugs.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant used marijuana from 1995 
until 2010. He has not used marijuana for a year and passed a voluntary drug test after 
his hearing. The only change of circumstances in his life is that he stopped using 
6 
 
marijuana when he applied for a security clearance for employment with a defense 
contractor. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to establish changed 
circumstances or a change in life style sufficient to establish he will not use illegal drugs 
in the future. He failed to meet his burden showing his long term drug use does not still 
reflect adversely on his reliability, honesty, trustworthiness, and good judgment. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns for illegal 
drug use from 1995 until May 2010. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
