1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No. 10-08876 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to sensitive information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2009, Applicant submitted a public trust position application 
(SF-85P). On December 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct).  
 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response, and DOHA received her 
answer on January 24, 2011. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 3, 
2 
 
2011. The case was assigned to me on May 20, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on June 3, 2011, scheduling the hearing for June 21, 2011. The hearing was held as 
scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The list of Government Exhibits was marked as Exhibit (Ex.) 
I. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were received without objection.  
 
I held the record open until June 30, 2011, to afford the Applicant an opportunity 
to submit additional material. Applicant did not submit any additional material. By 
memorandum dated July 7, 2011, Department Counsel forwarded a letter from 
Applicant’s employer dated June 17, 2011, advising that she no longer was in a position 
that requires an ADP public trust determination. That letter along with Department 
Counsel’s forwarding memorandum was marked Ex. II. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 1, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. Her answers with 
explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old research analyst, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since January 2002. She seeks to gain access to sensitive 
information in conjunction with a public trust position. (GE 1, Tr. 19-24.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1996. She has not pursued 
education beyond high school. Applicant married in May 2001, separated in July 2005, 
and divorced in March 2006. She has no dependents. Applicant has a boyfriend with 
whom she lives and shares expenses. In 2008, she became pregnant and went on 
maternity leave. While on maternity leave, she encountered a pay problem and was not 
paid for “two or three months.” Her child was stillborn. Applicant did not serve in the 
armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 24-27.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 17 debts totalling approximately $23,200. (Tr. 10.) 
These debts consist of one judgment and various collection, past-due, and charged-off 
accounts. In March 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator and during that interview, the investigator reviewed 
Applicant’s debts with her in detail. Applicant stated during that interview that her 
financial problems began about two years before, that she had been unemployed due to 
medical problems, and that the disability pay she eventually received did not cover her 
bills. She relied on her boyfriend for support, but he also experienced periods of 
3 
 
unemployment. She also mentioned that her financial problems were caused in part by 
poor money management and overextending herself on credit cards. Applicant also 
stated during that interview that she intended to file bankruptcy. (GE 2.) Applicant added 
during her hearing testimony that her financial situation began to deteriorate after she 
separated from her husband in July 2005. She explained that her mail was not being 
forwarded to her and reiterated what she told the OPM investigator in March 2010. (Tr. 
27-29.) 
 
In approximately June 2010, Applicant began consulting bankruptcy attorneys, 
but was unable to file bankruptcy until she had enough money to pay upfront attorney 
and filing fees. (Tr. 29-30.)  On November 16, 2010, Appellant filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. All of her SOR debts are included among the creditors listed in her 
bankruptcy pleadings. Applicant also completed the required financial counselling in 
conjunction with filing bankruptcy. (GE 7, AE A.) She is on a 36-month payment plan, 
which became effective in December 2010. Initially, she was paying $485; however, her 
monthly payments were increased to $540 in June 2011. At the time of her hearing, 
Applicant had established a six-month track record of timely payments. These payments 
are remitted to the trustee by employer payroll deductions.  (AE B, AE C, Tr. 31-33, 71.) 
Applicant’s annual income is approximately $35,000. Her net monthly remainder is 
“about $150.” (Tr. 33-35.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay all of her overdue 
creditors. She remains current on the rest of her monthly bills. Her budget further 
demonstrates that she maintains a modest lifestyle and is living within her means.  (GE 
7, Tr. 35-36, 41-42.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
When Applicant completed her September 2009 SF-85P, she failed to disclose a 
March 2009 judgment and failed to disclose any loans or financial obligations currently 
over 180 days delinquent. These failures to fully disclose her financial situation were 
alleged as deliberate falsifications.  Applicant explained in her SOR response, “I was 
truthful to my knowledge of my debts when I submitted all paperwork. I was continually 
having problems running my credit report.” (SOR response.) Applicant added during her 
hearing testimony that her former husband was not cooperative in forwarding her mail. 
Applicant credibly testified that she was not attempting to be misleading or deceptive 
when completing her SF-85P. Knowing what she knows today, she would have 
answered the questions differently. (Tr. 12, 37-40, 43-48, 52-53, 80.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
4 
 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated 17 delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $23,200. Her indebtedness began in 2005 following her separation and 
was ongoing until she filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2010. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Applicant experienced a 
separation and divorce, a period of unemployment, and a payroll error that resulted in 
her receiving no pay while on maternity leave. Although she eventually received her 
disability pay, the lack of income during this critical time adversely impacted her 
financial situation. Three potential mitigating conditions apply under this concern. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted, Applicant was 
involved in a separation and divorce, a period of unemployment, a pregnancy that 
ended in a stillborn birth, and payroll problems. It was not until June 2010 that Applicant 
began seeking professional help through a bankruptcy attorney. While Applicant stated 
that she found herself overwhelmed, she did very little, if anything, to address her 
financial situation from July 2005 to June 2010. It is for that reason that I am unable to 
give her full credit under this mitigating condition. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies where “the person has received or is receiving counseling for 
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.” Applicant participated in mandatory financial counseling in conjunction 
with her bankruptcy filing. She is doing everything required of her and is current in her 
monthly payments to her bankruptcy trustee. Her creditors are being repaid under the 
6 
 
bankruptcy plan. Applicant’s budget reflects that she is living within her means. Full 
credit under this mitigating condition is appropriate.  
 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ I note Applicant’s 
financial problems are not recent, and she has been employed since January 2002, 
albeit not without interruption or challenges. 
 
While it took some time for Applicant to address her indebtedness, I note that her 
financial situation during this timeframe was precarious given her limited income and 
obligations. To her credit, she recognized that she needed to address her financial 
situation and did so when able beginning in 2010. Rather than file Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
and receive a complete discharge of her debts, she opted to file Chapter 13 and as 
such is paying all of her creditors. At the time of her hearing, she had established a six-
month track record of steady payments. Applicant is also making her monthly 
bankruptcy payments through payroll deductions. Full credit under this mitigating 
condition is warranted. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to this guideline pertains to conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. AG ¶ 15. 
 
AG ¶ 16 indicates two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
 
Posing potential trustworthiness concerns are Applicant’s documented omissions 
of her March 2009 judgment and debts past due over 180 days on her September 2009 
7 
 
SF-85P. Her omissions are attributable to her misunderstanding and oversight. I found 
Applicant’s explanation credible in light of her belief that she was unaware that a 
judgment had been entered against her and that her credit had deteriorated to the point 
that it had. The transitory lifestyle she maintained following her separation in 2005 until 
recently and uncertainty over her debts clearly contributed to her limited knowledge of 
the true state of her financial situation. As noted, Applicant’s former husband was not 
forwarding bills that may have been her responsibility.  
 
I found Applicant’s explanation that her omissions were not intentional to be 
credible. She remained steadfast in her position despite thorough cross-examination by 
Department Counsel. While Applicant could reasonably have been expected to be more 
diligent and thorough when responding to questions regarding her past financial 
situation, her judgment lapses and confusion are not enough to impute knowing and 
willful falsification under Guideline E. Applicant’s explanation of her omissions is 
persuasive enough to avert inferences of knowing and willful omission. There being no 
misconduct substantiated, discussion of personal conduct mitigating conditions is not 
warranted. I also took into account Applicant’s age, temperament, demeanor, 
educational background, financial experience, and life experience. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in this 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant is taking the steps needed to achieve 
financial responsibility. Her creditors are being repaid. Applicant lives a modest lifestyle 
and does not spend extravagantly. She is doing her level best to recover from the 
financial fallout following a failed relationship, unemployment, and unplanned loss of 
income following maternity leave. While Applicant’s financial state is not where she 
would like it to be, it is clear that she takes this process seriously and is determined to 
regain financial responsibility. Considering her demeanor and testimony, I believe 
8 
 
Applicant has learned from her mistakes, and it is unlikely she will incur future debt that 
she is unable to pay. She seeks the honorable route of repaying her creditors. Applicant 
is an individual who was caught up in a bad situation and is doing her level best to 
regain a sense of normalcy. She enjoys her job and emphasized she would not do 
anything inappropriate to net an unlawful gain. Her modest income in this current 
economy is her lifeline to achieving and maintaining financial responsibility.  
 
I also considered the facts of the case and nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a) supra relating to personal conduct concerns. Falsifications are a core 
security concern. Inasmuch as Applicant’s behavior was not deliberate or willful, no 
misconduct was established precluding the applicability of further discussion under the 
whole-person concept. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised. Applicant met her ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable Public Trust Position determination. I take this position 
based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my 
careful consideration of the whole-person factors1
 
 and supporting evidence, my 
application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude she is eligible for access to a public trust position. 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1a – q:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2a – 2b:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
1See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
9 
 
  
