 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------------- ) ISCR Case: 10-01937 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On November 5, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (e-QIP). On March 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 3, 2011, and requested that the case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 27, 2011, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine Items and mailed 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant a complete copy on June 2, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on June 14, 
2011, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. She did not submit any additional documentation on or before July 14, 
2011. On August 3, 2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is not married. 
Applicant lives with her relatives. She started her current position in June 2009. (Items 4 
and 5) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from November 20, 2009; February 28, 
2011; and May 20, 2011, the SOR alleged nine delinquent debts totaling $35,200.00. All 
debts are owed to banks or collectors on behalf of stores. All debts appear to have 
originated as credit card debts. Applicant admitted that she owed all of the debts alleged 
in the SOR. (Items 3 to 9) 
 
 Applicant’s interview with a government investigator in December 2009 
confirmed that she was not paying her delinquent debts, which dated from 2003. She 
did not submit any documentary evidence to prove she paid any money on these debts. 
In 2003 and 2004 Applicant used credit cards to pay rent, purchase food, and other 
acquisitions. She then used the income from her part-time jobs to pay monthly 
expenses and attend college part-time. Her financial statement of December 10, 2010, 
attached to her interrogatories, showed her net monthly income as $1,714 and 
expenses as $1,674, leaving a net remainder of $40. Applicant also did not provide any 
payment history or the current balances of each debt at the time of her answer. It 
cannot be determined based on the evidence if any of them have been paid or resolved. 
She did not submit any evidence to contradict the information contained in the CBRs. 
(Items 1, 3, 5-9)  
   
Applicant did not submit any documentation that she participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of 
her job performance. She submitted no character references or other evidence 
tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to 
evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have 
her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
4 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on three CBRs and her admissions, Applicant has been unable or 
unwilling to satisfy delinquent debts that began accruing in 2003 and 2004 and remain 
unpaid at the present. Applicant admitted she charged purchases on her credit cards 
during 2003 and 2004 totaling $35,200, but never repaid the debts. She ignored the 
debts because she did not have full-time jobs and used any income from her part-time 
jobs to support herself. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
5 
 
 
Because Applicant’s financial delinquencies have been ongoing since 2004, 
remain unresolved, and are not isolated, there is insufficient evidence to support a 
finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply.  
 
Applicant did not present credible evidence that the accumulation of the debt was 
due to conditions beyond her control or that she attempted to responsibly manage that 
debt once it accrued, as required under AG ¶ 20(b). This mitigating condition does not 
apply. 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 20(d). She did not 
submit evidence that she received credit counseling or that she paid or resolved any 
debt, which would indicate that the situation is coming under control. Nor, did she 
present evidence that she made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve any of the nine 
debts. Therefore, these two mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
Applicant did not provide documentation verifying that she formally disputed or 
investigated any debt. Evidence of those efforts is necessary to trigger the application of 
AG & 20(e). This mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence to support the application of AG & 20(f) concerning 
affluence resulting from a legal source.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a federal contractor since 2009. In December 2009, when interviewed by 
 
6 
 
 
the government investigator, she learned of the Government’s concerns relating to her 
financial delinquencies. In June 2011, the Government filed the FORM. For almost a 
year, she has been on notice that her delinquent debts were creating security concerns 
and potentially affecting her employment.  Despite that knowledge, she did not provide 
proof that she had taken any steps to address the delinquent debts. Applicant failed to 
demonstrate financial rehabilitation, which is required to assure the Government that the 
recurrence or continuance of these unaddressed obligations is unlikely. The record 
contains insufficient evidence about her character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to 
mitigate these concerns or make their continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:             Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
