 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-04218 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA) on January 27, 
2010. On April 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on April 27, 2011; answered it on May 26, 2011; and 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
 2
submitted the government’s written case on June 20, 2011. On June 21, 2011, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the government’s evidence. He received the FORM on July 6, 2011, and 
responded on July 27, 2011. Department Counsel had no objection to the materials 
submitted in his response. The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, and 1.d. He admitted omitting a delinquent debt from his SCA as alleged in SOR ¶ 
2.a, but he denied intentional falsification. His admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old project manager for a federal contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since August 2008. He served in the U.S. Army from 
August 1988 to August 2008, retiring as a master sergeant (pay grade E-8). His military 
service included a one-year tour of duty in Iraq. (DD Form 214, included in Item 6 at 
2131) While on active duty, he earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2007. He earned a 
master’s degree in May 2009, after he retired from the Army. He has held a top secret 
clearance since August 2003. 
 
 Applicant married in July 1989. He and his wife have three children, ages 23, 19, 
and 16. He has a 14-year-old daughter by another woman with whom he had a “one-
night stand.” He was notified by state authorities around 2006 that a child support 
judgment had been entered against him, and that he owed an arrearage of $27,500 for 
payments dating back to his out-of-wedlock daughter’s birth in 1997.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “No” to question 26m, asking if 
he had ever been over 180 days delinquent on any debts, and question 26n, asking if 
he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts. He disclosed that his wages 
had been garnished for child support payments, and he stated that the account was 
current. (Item 5 at 47-48.) He did not disclose any other delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau report (CBR) dated February 4, 2010, reflected that his 
home mortgage was current, but that he had been 60 days delinquent in the past. (Item 
8 at 4.) It reflected that his charge account with a home improvement store was 90 days 
delinquent in the amount of $305. (Item 8 at 8.) It reflected three military credit card 
accounts: one closed account with a zero balance that was 180 days delinquent; a 
second closed account with a zero balance that was 30 days past due; and a third open 
account with a balance of $2,808 and no past-due balance. (Item 8 at 6-7.) He told a 
security investigator he did not disclose the home-improvement debt on his SCA due to 
                                                          
1 Item 6 is a bulky compilation of interrogatories and attachments, with the first page numbered 159 and 
the last page numbered 213. Because of the size of the exhibit, I have not renumbered the pages to 
begin with the numeral 1. 
 
 3
an oversight. (Item 6 at 160.) In his response to the SOR, he stated that he mistakenly 
omitted the home-improvement debt. 
 
 Applicant’s CBR dated November 18, 2010, reflected that his home mortgage 
was current; his charge account with the home improvement store was closed by the 
creditor but had a balance of $1,511; one military credit card account was sold or 
transferred and another was closed by Applicant, both with a zero balance; and an open 
account with the military exchange service with a balance of $2,158. It also reflected a 
child support collection account with a balance of $26,960. (Item 7 at 1-3.) This credit 
report reflected past delinquencies but did not reflect that any of the above accounts 
were currently delinquent.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant outlined a number of unexpected 
expenses that caused him and his spouse to fall behind on their debt payments after his 
retirement from the Army. These included educational expenses for their children, 
unexpected car repairs, uninsured vandalism of their home, a car accident with a deer, 
and an unexpected and uninsured root canal and crown for a fractured molar. (Item 4 at 
16.) 
 
 The evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a (mortgage past due for $3,631). In his response to DOHA 
interrogatories dated January 18, 2011, Applicant submitted a credit report reflecting 
that his home mortgage was past due in the amount of $3,631, and he stated that he 
had made payment arrangements to resolve it. (Item 6 at 171, 173, 204.) His response 
to the FORM includes an account statement showing that payments are current. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b (child support collection account for $26,910). Applicant’s CBR 
dated November 18, 2010, reflected a child support collection account with a balance of 
$26,960. (Item 7 at 1-3.) His military retired pay is being garnished at the rate of $500 
per month, and his federal tax returns are being seized to pay the debt. (Item 4 at 9-11; 
Item 6 at 196.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c (home-improvement store debt 90 days past due for $1,667). 
Applicant’s CBR dated February 4, 2010, reflected that his charge account with a home-
improvement store was 90 days delinquent in the amount of $305. (Item 8 at 8.) His 
CBR dated November 18, 2010, reflected that his charge account with the home-
improvement store was closed by the creditor but had a balance of $1,511. (Item 7 at 
1.) In January 2011, Applicant enrolled in a consumer credit counseling program 
(CCCP) that included nine debts, including the home-improvement debt. (Item 6 at 192-
95.) In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted a CBR dated January 7, 
2011, showing that he was “paying as agreed” on this debt, with no payments past due. 
(Item 6 at 205.) His response to the FORM includes an updated accounting statement 
from the CCCP reflecting payments on all included debts through July 2011. 
 
 
 4
 SOR ¶ 1.d (charged off account with military exchange for $9,051). 
Applicant’s CBR dated February 4, 2010, reflected three military credit card accounts: 
one closed account with a zero balance that was 180 days delinquent; a second closed 
account with a zero balance that was 30 days past due; and a third open account with a 
balance of $2,808 and no past-due balance. (Item 8 at 6-7.) His CBR dated November 
18, 2010, reflected one military credit card account that was sold or transferred, another 
that was closed by Applicant, both with a zero balance; and an open account with the 
military exchange service with a balance of $2,158. (Item 7 at 1-2.) The debt to the 
military exchange service is included in his CCCP program. (Item 6 at 193.) His CBR 
dated January 7, 2011, reflects that he was “paying as agreed” on this debt, with a 
balance of $2,093. (Item 6 at 203-05.) In his response to the SOR, Applicant submitted 
a detailed account summary from the military exchange service, reflecting his monthly 
$250 payments from June 2009 through April 2011. His response to the FORM includes 
documentation that payments on this debt through the CCCP continued through July 
2011. (CHECK) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
 5
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts: a mortgage account past due for about 
$3,631 (¶ 1.a); unpaid child support payments totaling about $26,910 (¶ 1.b); an 
account with a home-improvement store past due for about $1,667 (¶ 1.c), and a 
charged-off debt to a military exchange store for about $9,051 (¶ 1.d.). The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under this guideline are AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). 
 
 
 6
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that the mortgage account alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a was delinquent, even though the two CBRs in the FORM reflected that it 
was current. However, his CBR also indicated that he had been delinquent in the past. 
He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d, but his CBRs reflect that the child support 
arrearage in SOR ¶ 1.b was referred for collection, the home-improvement debt was 90 
days delinquent in the amount of $305, and a delinquent military credit card account 
had been charged off. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (b). 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts are ongoing, recent, and did not 
occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant related several circumstances beyond his control: unexpected medical 
expenses, unexpected car repairs, and uninsured vandalism of their home. Applicant’s 
answer is uncorroborated, but it is also undisputed by Department Counsel. Applicant 
has acted responsibly by negotiating payment agreements, renegotiating his home 
mortgage, and enrolling in a consumer credit counseling program. I conclude that this 
mitigating condition is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is established for debts to the military exchange service and the 
home-improvement store that are being paid through the consumer credit counseling 
program. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
“A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s personal debts. Rather, a security clearance adjudication is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in order to 
make a decision about an applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
(App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) 
 
 7
 
 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement 
that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Through a combination of responsible 
measures, he has brought his mortgage account up to date and established payment 
plans for the other debts alleged in the SOR. His consumer credit counseling program 
goes beyond the debts alleged in the SOR and is designed to restore his financial 
responsibility.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by answering “No” to the two 
questions related to delinquent debts and deliberately failing “to disclose the accounts 
set for in subparagraph 1.c through 1.c, above. (Emphasis added.)  
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 The drafting error in SOR ¶ 2.a, referring to plural “accounts” but listing 
“subparagraph 1.c through 1.c,” renders the SOR ambiguous. The reference to the 
plural “accounts” suggests the drafter’s intent to allege that Applicant failed to disclose 
more than one delinquent account. However, Applicant construed it as alleging a failure 
to disclose only the home-improvement debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. I conclude that Applicant did 
not have fair notice of the specific reasons for the proposed action required by Directive 
¶¶ 4.3.1 and E.3.1.3.  
 
 Applicant admitted failing to disclose the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he did 
not admit intentional falsification. When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in 
 
 8
this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, 
does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence 
as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See 
ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Apart from the fair-notice issue, I have noted that when Applicant submitted his 
SCA his CBR reflected that his mortgage was current, it did not reflect the child support 
arrearage, and it reflected two military credit card accounts with zero balances and a 
third account with no past-due balance. The only debt arguably encompassed by the 
SCA questions was the home-improvement debt, which the credit report listed as 90 
days past due for $308. The CBR does not establish that the debt was required to be 
disclosed, because it reflected that it was 90 days past due, not “over 90 days 
delinquent.” Furthermore, given the small amount involved in relation to the other 
financial issues that Applicant was facing, his explanation that he overlooked the debt is 
plausible and credible. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army for twenty years, retiring as a senior 
noncommissioned officer. His service included duty in a combat zone. He has held a 
security clearance for many years, apparently without incident. His most onerous 
financial obligation is the result of a foolish “one-night stand” many years ago, and he 
did not learn that he had fathered a child until nine years later. He is addressing that 
obligation honorably to the best of his ability. As he was making the transition from 
 
 9
military service to civilian employment, he encountered multiple financial obstacles, 
which he is now overcoming.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to decide close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
refuted the allegation that he falsified his SCA, and he has mitigated the security 
concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
