  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05748 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In 1998, after leaving active duty and before obtaining his current job, Applicant 
used illegal drugs sporadically. He did so while a member of the U.S. Air Force 
Reserve. In 2003, when he completed a security clearance questionnaire, he falsified 
his answers related to illegal drug use. Due to the frequency of his use, the passage of 
time, and the likelihood the conduct will not recur, Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns under personal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
1 
 
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
                                                          
Reasons (SOR) on February 8, 2011, detailing security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. 
  
 On February 17, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On May 5, 2011, I was assigned the case. On June 15, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 30, 2011.  At the hearing, the Government offered 
exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through T, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. He called two additional witnesses. On July 12, 2011, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR, and his admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
evidence on record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old heating and air conditioning technician who has 
worked for a defense contractor since July 2003. He is also a technical sergeant (E-6) in 
the United States Air Force Reserve, currently with 20 years of service. He was on 
active duty from February 1991 until 1998. (Tr. 62) In 2009, he was activated and 
served for six months in Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, for which he 
received an Air Force Commendation Medal. (Tr. 58, Ex. L) For the last eight years, he 
has been performing his reserve duty approximately 900 miles from his home. During 
this time, he has spent in excess of $25,000 going to and from his reserve unit for 
training. (Tr. 58) He seeks to obtain a clearance. In 2004, an earlier clearance request 
was denied by another government agency due to his marijauana and cocaine use in 
2002/2003.  
 
 Applicant’s most recent Enlisted Performance Report (EPR), AF Form 910, dated 
January 2011, rates his overall performance as a “5” “Truly Among the Best.” (Ex. H) 
His service in Operation Iraqi Freedom was from March 2009 to September 2009, for 
which he receiving the Iraqi campaign medal as well as the previously listed AF 
Commendation Medal. (Ex. J, L) For his outstanding achievement in July 2002, he 
received an AF Achievement Medal, first oak leaf cluster. (Ex. I) 
 
Applicant’s commanders, coworkers, supervisors, and friends state: Applicant 
sets high standards, has a strong work ethic, displays great service, has great rapport 
with his coworkers, shows great leadership, and is extremely dependable, competent, 
dedicated, loyal, honest, and trusted. (Ex. C, D, E, F, G, O, P, Q) His EPR from January 
2002 through December 2010 lists his overall performance assessment at “Above 
Average (4),” “Immediate Promotion (6)”, or “Truly Among the Best (5).” (Ex. R, S, T, 
SOR Answer2) 
2 AF Reserve enlisted personnel receive EPRs every two years.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                          
 
Applicant’s former AF Reserve supervisor of seven years has known the 
Applicant for 15 years. (Tr. 32) In 2009, they were deployed to Iraq together. (Tr. 33) He 
stated Applicant is a model airman, who can be counted on to do anything asked of him. 
He has never had reason to question Applicant’s judgment. (Tr. 34) His former 
supervisor stated, if he were ever called upon to chose a team to perform a task at any 
location in the world, Applicant would be one of his first choices for that team. (Tr. 42) A 
former supervisor at Applicant’s civilian job stated Applicant was trustworthy and 
someone who could be counted on to get the job accomplished. (Tr. 52)  
 
Applicant acknowledged he made mistakes and his actions were wrong. (Tr. 60) 
From high school until 1998, he never used any illegal drugs. (Tr. 67) From 1998 to 
October 2003, Applicant used illegal drugs. In July 2002, he used marijuana one time 
with his now ex-wife. (Ex. 2, Tr. 73) He used cocaine three times in the fall of 1998, after 
having left active duty. He used it again in July 2003 and also in October 2003. (Ex. 2, 
Tr. 71) His use occurred while he held a secret clearance in the AF Reserve. 
 
Applicant acknowledges he made some bad mistakes when he left active duty 
and returned to the small town where he grew up. (Tr. 55) In the summer of 1998, 
Applicant separated from the Air Force after eight years with an honorable discharge. 
(Tr. 56) When he left active duty, he believed his clearance was pulled. (Tr. 65) Upon 
returning to civilian life, he moved back to his home state to begin working and had 
casual encounters with school friends. After a couple of encounters where he used 
drugs, he quickly realized this was not his “environment and broke away from those 
people.” (Ex. 2) In 2003, he knew he had to get away from that environment and moved 
to another state, where he now lives. (Tr. 56)  
 
During the summer of 2003, Applicant’s marriage of five years had ended in 
divorce, he tried cocaine once. He had married the year before he left active duty. (Tr. 
82) During the same year, his father3 was diagnosed with cancer. In October 2003, 
feeling bad for himself and his father, he again used cocaine. His last cocaine use was 
before being hired at this current job. (Tr. 83) His cousin gave him three Percocet 
tablets and told him they were good for severe headaches. (Tr. 75) Between June 2003 
and the spring of 2004, he used the three tablets to get rid of hangovers.  
 
In 2004, Applicant was working for his current employer and held a top secret 
clearance. A construction project required a higher clearance, which required a 
polygraph examination. Through the polygraph, his one use of marijuana and his five 
uses of cocaine, including his two uses in 2003, were discovered. Additionally, the 
polygraph revealed he had used Percocet two or three times between June 2003 and 
May 2004 to help him with headaches. He got the Percocet from his cousin. (Ex. 3) He 
has not used any illegal drugs since May 2004, when he used a Percocet tablet. (Ex. 3) 
In December 2009, his clearance was suspended. (Ex. 5)  
 
3 In August 2005, his father died from the cancer. (Tr. 88) 
 
4 
 
In August 2003, Applicant completed a security clearance application, Standard 
Form (SF 86). He answered “no” to question 27, which asked if he had used any illegal 
drug, including marijuana and cocaine, in the last seven years. He also answered “no” 
to question 28, which asked if had ever used illegal drugs while possessing a security 
clearance. Applicant does not deny he deliberately gave false information. (Tr. 76)  
 
In October 2009, when Applicant completed his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he stated in response to section 25, Investigations 
and Clearance Record, that another government agency “has denied my clearance with 
them due to the use of the Marijuana and cocaine back in 2002/2003.” (Ex. 1) In 
response to section 24, Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, he listed his marijuana, 
cocaine, and Percocet use.  
 
 Applicant is the parent of a bright, ten-year-old daughter, who in the fifth grade is 
doing tenth grade work. (Tr. 20, 59, Ex. A, Ex. B)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 provides three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in regard to falsification of Applicant’s security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 
6 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
Applicant admits he used marijuana once in July 2002 and cocaine five times 
between the fall of 1998 and October 2003. He also admits used Percocet three times 
between June 2003 and May 2004. He admits he deliberately gave false answers on his 
August 2003 security clearance application when asked about his illegal drug usage. 
The disqualifying conditions in ¶ 16(a), 16(b), and 16(d) apply.  
 
Applicant marijuana and cocaine use occurred after leaving active duty with the 
Air Force and before Applicant obtained his current job. He last used one of the three 
Percocet tablets his cousin gave him in May 2004, which was after being hired at this 
current job. His most recent illegal drug use occurred more than seven years ago. His 
deliberate falsification of his SF 86 occurred approximately eight years ago in August 
2003. 
 
Applicants are expected to give full and frank answers during the clearance 
process. Applicant acknowledges that his failure to disclose his illegal drug on his 
clearance application was a deliberate falsification. His failure to disclose this 
information demonstrates a lack of candor required of cleared personnel. The 
Government has an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse information 
about an applicant before making a clearance decision. The Government relies on 
applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not when 
they perceive disclosure to be prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness 
to report adverse information about himself provides some indication of his willingness 
to report inadvertent security violations or other security concerns in the future, 
something the Government relies on to perform damage assessments and limit the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides three conditions that could be mitigating regarding Applicant’s 
use of illegal drugs and the falsification of his security clearance application:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
7 
 
 
The mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17(c) apply. It is not that the conduct 
was minor, for illegal drug usage and falsification of a security clearance application are 
both serious, but that so much time has passed. The last use of the three Percocet 
tablets occurred in May 2004, more than seven years ago. The falsification occurred 
almost a year before that. The conduct is not recent. Additionally, the behavior was 
infrequent. He used marijuana once since high school, cocaine five times between 
leaving active duty in 1998 and starting his current job in 2003, and used three Percocet 
tablets. This is infrequent drug usage. The falsification was to two questions on a single 
security questionnaire. This was serious, but is also infrequent behavior.  
 
The mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17(d) apply. Applicant acknowledges 
his conduct was wrong. He has not obtained counseling to change his behavior, but his 
actions since the conduct shows it is unlikely to recur. For the past nine years, Applicant 
has spent more than $25,000 for transportation to and from his reserve unit. 
Additionally, former supervisors attested to his good character.  
 
The mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17(g) apply. Applicant no longer 
associates with those persons with whom he used illegal drugs. He smoked marijuana 
one time with his wife, from whom he is now divorced. He realized when he was using 
the illegal drugs that he needed to get out of that environment and moved to another 
state. His contact with those individuals has ceased. His last uses of cocaine occurred 
following his divorce and after learning of his father’s diagnosis of lung cancer. These 
circumstances will not recur. As set forth in AG ¶ 17(b), those stressors, circumstances, 
or factors are no longer part of his life.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There are three major concerns. 
First, Applicant used illegal drugs. Second, he used those illegal drugs while holding a 
security clearance. Third, he lied about his drug usage on his security questionnaire. 
This is serious conduct, which Applicant admits. His drug usage was infrequent and 
ended more than seven years ago. When he left active duty, he believed his clearance 
was pulled. He used the illegal drugs sporadically before obtaining his current job. Since 
obtaining his current job in 2003, his only misuse of drugs was the use of the three 
Percocet tablets ended in May 2004. Applicant should have told the truth about his 
illegal drug usage when he completed his security questionnaire. He acknowledges that 
and acknowledges that his conduct was wrong.  He revealed his drug usage on his 
latest security questionnaire. 
 
 I considered Applicant's 20 years of service in the Air Force, his service in Iraq, 
the recommendations of those he has served with, his favorable military evaluations, 
and character evidence. I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, 
observe his manner and deportment, appraise the way in which he responded to 
questions, assess his candor or evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his 
testimony. I find the conduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
The issue is not simply whether Applicant used illegal drugs and lied on his 
questionnaire – he did and has acknowledge doing so – it is whether his personal 
conduct occurring more than seven years ago raises concerns about his fitness to hold 
a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
