KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Record reasonably supports Judge’s finding concerning the number of times
Applicant’s mother visited Iran.  The Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Adverse
decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 10-01273.a1
DATE: 08/22/2011
DATE: August 22, 2011
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-01273
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 10, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On May 31, 2011, after the hearing,  Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant  appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a 30-year-old single
man with no children.  He is an Iranian-American born and raised in the United States.  His parents
immigrated to the United States from Iran after the Iranian revolution in 1979.  Both parents are
naturalized U.S. citizens.  The Iranian government considers Applicant to be an Iranian citizen by
virtue of his father’s Iranian citizenship.  Applicant’s mother and father divorced approximately ten
years ago.  Since the divorce, Applicant’s contact with his father has been sporadic. Applicant lives
with his mother, sister, nephew, half-sister, and brother-in-law.  Applicant’s mother is a hair stylist.
She became a naturalized citizen in the early 1990s.  She has no Iranian property interests.  She
traveled to Iran nearly every year over the past decade to visit her family.  She has not visited since
2008 because of the political instability.  She intends to return in the future.  Applicant traveled with
his mother to Iran in 2003 and 2008 to visit relatives and sightsee. 
Applicant’s brother-in-law is an Iranian citizen with permanent U.S. residency status.
Applicant’s maternal grandmother lives in Iran.  Applicant has five maternal uncles living in Iran.
Applicant has several cousins who are either living in Iran or are Iranian citizens living elsewhere.
Iran is a brutally repressive theocracy that is virulently anti-American, and seeks to dominate
the Middle East through sponsoring terrorism, fomenting unrest in other countries, and developing
weapons of mass destruction.  Iran’s government employs draconian methods such as torture, rape,
flogging, and amputations of dissenters to instill fear and retain power.  Since 2007, several U.S.
citizens have been detained by the Iranian government and held without consular access.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Although friendly countries can engage in
activities involving coercion, persuasion or duress of an individual to gather classified information
as readily as hostile countries, the risk of such activity is heightened with hostile countries because
such countries are not likely to have scruples about pressuring one of its citizens to obtain classified
information.  Although Applicant’s contact with his relatives living in Iran is casual and infrequent,
his mother travels to Iran nearly every year and intends to return.  Because Iran is a country where
U.S. travelers have been detained over the years, Applicant’s mother’s trips to Iran generate a
security concern.  Applicant is an impressive individual who testified in an engaging manner.  Given
the frequency of his mother’s trips to Iran, and the nature of the Iranian government, the burden is
simply too high for him to overcome.  Applicant has failed to mitigate the foreign influence security
concern.
Applicant asserts that the Judge misinterpreted the testimony and admissions he made at the
hearing, and states that the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s mother has visited Iran nearly every year
in the last ten years is incorrect.  Applicant states that his mother has traveled to Iran only four times
in the last ten years and has not been there since 2008.  Applicant also alleges that his mother
currently has no plans to go to Iran in the future because of increased security concerns.  Applicant
also states that his mother feels a sense of patriotism to the United States and would never do
anything to jeopardize her safety, his safety or the national security.  Applicant also states that his
honesty, strong work ethic and sense of patriotic duty to the United States support a favorable
security clearance decision.  Applicant’s assertions do not establish error on the part of the Judge.
The record evidence does not establish exactly how many times Applicant’s mother has
traveled to Iran since she made her initial trip back to that country in approximately 2002.
Applicant’s entire testimony on this point consists of the following: “And she goes–she tries to go
maybe– she was trying to go once a year for the first few years.  And now she hasn’t gone in the last
two years.  So, we can say she likes to visit maybe once a year.”  Although lacking in detail on the
precise point, the record evidence reasonably supports, through inference, the Judge’s finding that
Applicant’s mother has visited Iran nearly every year since 2002.  Regarding Applicant’s mother’s
future intentions regarding travel to Iran, the record evidence indicates that, although she does not
want to go back at the present time owing to concerns about current conditions in Iran, there is the
possibility that she would go back at some point in time out of a desire to see her aging mother.  The
evidence also reflects that Applicant’s mother maintains an active Iranian passport.  This evidence
reasonably supports the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s mother intends to return to Iran in the
future.
Applicant attempts to clarify this evidence on appeal by stating that his mother has returned
to Iran only four times since 2002, and by asserting that “My mother’s intention to return to Iran in
the future is not a possibility.”  These matters constitute new evidence, which the Board cannot
consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.   
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with
the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at
3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He discussed the applicability of the mitigating factors listed under
Guideline B and, in fact, applied those factors in Applicant’s favor for the large portion of the
Government’s case that dealt with Applicant’s Iranian relatives other than his mother.  The Judge
nevertheless explained why the security concerns surrounding Applicant’s mother were unmitigated.
These conclusions were reasonable given the Judge’s findings regarding the likelihood of
Applicant’s mother’s future physical presence in Iran and the risks inherent in that presence given
the nature of the Iranian regime.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
   Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
