 
 
1
                                                
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-04330 
                       ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on September 28, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
 
 On November 15, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant signed a notarized Answer to the SOR on November 30, 2010, in which she 
admitted the allegation under Guideline B. She also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 18, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on June 3, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 8, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 28, 2011. I admitted two 
Government Exhibits, (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified, and offered one exhibit, which I 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of the facts relating to Sudan set forth in the 12 U.S. 
Government documents submitted by Department Counsel. (Hearing Exhibit II) The 
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and not 
subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 37 years old, was born in Sudan. She is single and has no children. In 
1998, she earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in Sudan. She worked 
there for a car company. She applied for a visa under the U.S. Department of State’s 
diversity visa (DV) lottery program, and won a visa to come to the United States. She 
arrived in 2001, at the age of 27. From 2003 to 2004, she completed graduate-level 
courses at a U.S. university, but did not receive a degree. Applicant became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006. She has worked as an engineer for U.S. companies. 
She is currently a quality control manager for a defense contractor, where she has been 
employed since 2009. Applicant speaks Arabic, and has been assigned to work for a 
federal agency in Nigeria. This is her first application for a security clearance. She is 
applying for a top secret security clearance. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 17-20, 30-31, 36-37)  
 
Applicant’s parents and siblings are citizens of Sudan and reside in a major city 
of northern Sudan. Her parents are both 63 years old, and both are retired from the 
teaching profession. Her father did not serve in the Sudanese military. They worked in 
public schools operated by the Ministry of Education. They do not receive government 
pensions. Applicant's parents own a home, but Applicant has told them she is not 
interested in any right she may have to the home. Her mother has visited Applicant 
 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
                                                
twice in the United States. During her last visit, she stayed with Applicant for nine 
months in 2007-2008. Her parents are not aware that she is applying for a security 
clearance. They would like to move here permanently. Applicant plans to sponsor her 
parents to come to the United States. An immigration attorney informed Applicant that 
when a U.S. citizen sponsors relatives, the process takes approximately 18 months. 
Applicant had not yet initiated the process as of the date of the hearing. (GE 1, 2; AE A; 
Tr. 18, 21-25, 31, 37, 41, 45-46) 
 
Applicant’s 34-year-old brother is married with two children. He is a sales 
representative for a private telecommunications company. He has never served in the 
Sudanese military. Applicant's 35-year-old sister is married and has four children. She is 
a medical doctor. Her husband is a mechanical engineer and is employed by a car 
company as an engineer. Applicant's 31-year-old sister is also married. She has two 
children, and is a statistician for a telecommunications company. Her husband works for 
the same company. He has never served in the Sudanese military. According to the 
personal statement she submitted at the hearing, she calls her siblings often.3 All of her 
siblings wish to immigrate to the United States with their families, and have applied for 
the DV lottery. (GE 1, 2; AE A; Tr. 25-30, 37-40) 
 
Applicant testified that her family lives in northern Sudan, in an area that was not 
affected by the recent fighting. Her family is not involved in Sudanese politics, and has 
never been associated with, or been questioned by, Sudanese authorities. Applicant 
visits Sudan often, whenever she has the time and the funds to do so. In her personal 
statement, she noted that she is fortunate that she is “able to keep close ties with my 
siblings and my immediate family by calling them often, and visiting them during my 
annual vacations when finances permit.” She traveled to Sudan to visit her family eight 
times between 2002 and 2008.4 (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 18, 31-32, 41-42) 
 
Applicant purchased a home in the United States in 2007. She does not own 
property in Sudan, or have Sudanese bank accounts or business interests. She has 
three bank accounts in the United States. Applicant has never voted in a Sudanese 
election, but has voted in U.S. elections. She also belongs to a local political club in her 
community, and has volunteered her help during state-wide elections. She expressed 
her desire to “give back to a nation (USA) I have come to love and call my own.” (GE 1; 
AE A; Tr. 18-20, 33-34, 45, 47) 
 
 
 
3 Applicant’s statements about telephone contacts with her family are contradictory: during her security 
interview of January 2010, she denied talking with her parents or siblings by telephone. However, in her 
July 27, 2011 personal statement, she noted that she keeps “close ties with my siblings and my 
immediate family by calling them often…” (GE 2; AE A) 
 
4 Applicant’s Sudanese passport was issued in 2000 and expired in 2006. She surrendered it to her 
facility security officer for destruction. (GE 2; AE A) 
 
 
 
4
Administrative Notice: Sudan 
 
In 1953, the United Kingdom and Egypt concluded an agreement that provided 
for self-government for Sudan. After a transitional period, Sudan became independent, 
but the country then experienced 17 years of civil war until 1972. Civil war resumed in 
1983, when soldiers mutinied. The United States declared Sudan a state sponsor of 
terrorism in 1993. A rebellion in the Darfur region of western Sudan in 2003 resulted in 
the death of tens of thousands, and an estimated two million internally displaced 
persons. The Sudanese Government is accused of being complicit in the bombing, 
murder, and rape of innocent displaced persons from Darfur. In 2004, then-Secretary 
of State Colin Powell stated that the government of Sudan bore responsibility for the 
genocide committed in Darfur. President Clinton’s declaration in 1997 that Sudan 
presented an “unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign 
policy of the United States” was reaffirmed by President Bush in 2006. 
 
In 2005, a Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed, establishing a new 
Government of National Unity and the Interim Government of Southern Sudan. The 
interim period allowed for the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
and elections at all levels. Sudan has participated in operations against terrorism 
directed at U.S. interests. 
 
Sudan has experienced recent notable changes. In January 2011, elections 
were held and the people of southern Sudan voted to become independent. On 
February 7, 2011, Secretary of State Hilary Clinton congratulated the Government of 
Sudan for the peaceful and orderly referendum, and Southern Sudan for completing “a 
critical milestone in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.” On 
the same day, President Obama announced “the intention of the United States to 
formally recognize Southern Sudan as a sovereign, independent state in July 2011.” 
He also called the vote “an inspiration to the world and a step toward justice and 
democracy.” Both the President and Secretary of State noted that Sudan’s designation 
as a state sponsor of terrorism will be reviewed and considered for withdrawal, 
provided Sudan meets criteria set out in U.S. law.  
 
However, Sudan’s human rights record has been poor and numerous serious 
abuses have occurred, including extrajudicial and other unlawful killings by government 
forces; and torture, beatings, rape, and other cruel and inhumane treatment by security 
forces. There have been arbitrary arrests and detentions; violence against women and 
ethnic minorities; executive interference with the judiciary and denial of due process; 
restrictions on citizens’ privacy; and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
assembly, religion, and movement. In 2011, the U.S. State Department continued to 
warn against travel to Sudan, and noted that the terrorist threat level in the city where 
Applicant's family lives remained critical. It also has indicated that terrorists are known 
to operate in Sudan and seek opportunities to carry out attacks against U.S. interests. 
In addition, anti-American sentiment is prevalent and Americans are warned to 
exercise the utmost caution if traveling in Sudan. 
 
 
5
                                                
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be an impartial and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to safeguard 
classified information. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
5 Directive §6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
6
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion 
by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following conditions are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
 The possession of family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country is not 
disqualifying under Guideline B, unless those ties create a conflict of interest or a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation. The country in question must be considered. 
Sudan, despite recent progress, currently retains its designation as a state sponsor of 
terrorism. Applicant’s testimony and the record evidence indicate that she has ties of 
affection and obligation to her family in Sudan. She visits them as often as possible. 
According to the Department of State, travel to Sudan by U.S. citizens requires utmost 
caution. Moreover, Sudan is associated with a risk of terrorism. In a Travel Warning 
earlier this year, the State Department noted that the terrorist threat level in the city 
where Applicant's family lives remain critical. Applicant's ties and contacts with her 
foreign family represent a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, and a potential 
conflict of interest between her ties to her family and the requirement to protect 
classified information. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply.  
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, AG ¶ 8, 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
 
 
7
                                                
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 Applicant could be placed in a position that could force her to choose between 
U.S. and foreign interests. She is bound by strong ties of affection to her parents and 
siblings who are citizens and residents of Sudan, a country where human rights are 
violated.9 The government engages in unlawful killings, torture, beatings, and rape. It 
does not respect citizens’ privacy, and engages in arbitrary arrests and detentions, and 
denial of due process. AG ¶ 8(a) cannot be applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered the extent of Applicant's 
U.S. ties, including her ten years in the United States, her U.S. graduate studies, her 
two years of working for a U.S. defense contractor, and her home ownership. However, 
these facts must be weighed against her close relationships with foreign nationals. Her 
Sudanese parents and siblings, despite their wish to immigrate to the United States, 
remain in Sudan, with no definite timeframe for leaving. Her frequent trips to visit her 
foreign family demonstrate that her contacts are not casual, and that she has strong 
ties of affection and obligation to them. Given these ties to her foreign family, I cannot 
confidently conclude she would resolve a conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(b) and (c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (Ap. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
 
8
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States in not in question. She has U.S. ties 
through her work for the federal government, her employment with American 
companies, her graduate education, her home ownership, and her community 
involvement. However, her foreign ties place her in a position where she might have to 
choose between her family’s interests and the interests of the United States. 
Applicant’s foreign ties are significant, because her entire immediate family lives in 
Sudan. Her strong connection to them is obvious from her personal statement and her 
testimony. She visits them as often as her time and funds allow. These strong ties to 
foreign citizens raise security concerns. Although her family wishes to join her in the 
United States, at this point, they remain in Sudan. The political situation there has 
improved recently. However, the long-standing designation of state sponsor of 
terrorism has only recently been considered for review, and still remains in place. The 
U.S. State Department urges extreme caution by U.S. citizens traveling to Sudan 
because of terrorist activity. Applicant's ties of affection and obligation to her family in 
Sudan represent a heightened and unacceptable risk of foreign exploitation. 
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised under the guideline for foreign influence. 
Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
