 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05257 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Daniel B. Smith, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 2, 2011. The judge delayed scheduling the case because Applicant was in 
Iraq. The case was reassigned to me on June 7, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
 
2 
 
on June 17, 2011, as amended on June 21, 2011. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on July 14, 2011. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 22, 
2011. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted written requests that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Sudan and Libya. Applicant did not object to either request, and 
they were approved. The requests and the attached documents were not admitted into 
evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. On my own 
motion, I have taken administrative notice that South Sudan became an independent 
nation on July 9, 2011. See U.S. Department of State Travel Warning for the Republic 
of South Sudan dated July 12, 2011. (HE III) The facts administratively noticed about 
Sudan are set out in HE I and summarized below.   
 
Sudan 
 
In 1953, the United Kingdom and Egypt concluded an agreement that provided 
for self-government for Sudan. After a transitional period, Sudan became independent 
in 1956. Since then, they have experienced years of civil war with efforts to bring about 
peace. The U.S. State Department describes the history of Sudan as follows: 
 
Sudan has been at war with itself for more than three-quarters of its 
existence. Since independence, protracted conflict rooted in deep cultural 
and religious differences have slowed Sudan’s economic and political 
development and forced massive internal displacement of its people. 
Northerners, who have traditionally controlled the country, have sought to 
unify it along the lines of Arabism and Islam despite the opposition of non-
Muslims, southerners and marginalized peoples in the west and east. 
 
In 2005, a Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed, establishing a new 
Government of National Unity and the Interim Government of Southern Sudan. The 
interim period allowed for the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
and elections at all levels. The Republic of South Sudan separated from Sudan and 
became an independent nation on July 9, 2011.  
 
A rebellion in Darfur resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of persons there 
and has led to an estimated two million internally displaced persons in Sudan. The 
Sudanese Government is accused of being complicit in the bombing, murder, and rape 
 
3 
 
of innocent displaced persons from Darfur. The Sudanese President has demonstrated 
a continued refusal to honor his commitment to end the violence in Darfur.  
 
Sudan is under a broad U.S. embargo with extensive trade restrictions on 
exports to Sudan. The United States considers Sudan a threat to national security and 
the foreign policy of the United States.  
 
In 1993, the U.S. Secretary of State designated Sudan as a state sponsor of 
terrorism. Although Sudan pursues “counterterrorism operations directly involving 
threats to U.S. interests and personnel in Sudan,” the Sudanese government still openly 
supports HAMAS. Sudan remains on the state sponsor of terrorism list. However, 
following the Southern Sudan Referendum in January 2011, Secretary Clinton 
announced that the State Department was initiating the process of withdrawing Sudan’s 
state sponsor of terrorism designation, though Sudan must first meet all criteria spelled 
out in U.S. law.  
 
Sudan’s human rights record is poor. There are numerous serious abuses, 
including extrajudicial and other unlawful killings by government forces, torture, 
beatings, rape, and other cruel and inhumane treatment by security forces. There are 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, executive interference with the judiciary and denial of 
due process, restrictions on citizens’ privacy, and restrictions on freedom of speech, 
press, assembly, religion, and movement.  
 
The U.S. State Department continues to warn against all travel to Sudan. It also 
has indicated that terrorists are known to operate in Sudan and seek opportunities to 
carry out attacks against U.S. interests. In addition, anti-American sentiment is 
prevalent and Americans are warned to exercise the utmost caution in Sudan. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. He has an associate’s degree. He was married from 
1999 to 2002. He married his current wife in 2002. He has two children, ages seven and 
four, and his wife is pregnant.1  
 
 Applicant was born into a large family in Sudan. His family is from a tribe and an 
area of the Sudan that has been subjected to genocide and the human rights abuses 
described above. He has 15 siblings and half-siblings. One of his sisters was jailed 
because of her ethnicity. Applicant was expected to serve in the Sudanese military after 
college and fight the “holy war.” In order to avoid military service and the violence in 
Sudan, he fled to Egypt in 1998. He lived as a refugee until he was accepted for 
immigration to the United States in 1999. He became a U.S. citizen in 2008.2  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33-34, 43, 48-49, 68-69; GE 1-3; AE E, F. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-31, 61-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE G. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s father and mother are Sudanese citizens and residents. His parents 
owned small businesses, but they have both closed their businesses. They live on a 
farm. They have been separated for a number of years, but still live in the same house 
in different rooms. Applicant is sponsoring his mother to immigrate to the United States. 
She will go to the U.S. Embassy in a neighboring country to obtain her visa.3   
 
 Applicant’s brother fled Sudan to Libya in the early 1990s. He worked as a 
tradesman. He fled Libya when that country de-stabilized with violent clashes between 
demonstrators and government security forces. He is in a U.N.-sponsored refugee 
camp in Egypt on the Egyptian-Libyan border.4 Applicant has another brother who is in 
a refugee camp in Chad. These two brothers hope to immigrate to the United States.5  
 
 Applicant’s remaining family, including his siblings, half siblings, and two 
stepmothers are Sudanese citizens and residents. None of his family members have 
any direct connection to the Sudanese government, security forces, insurgent groups, 
or terrorists.6 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Sudan. Her family is from a different tribe and a 
different region of Sudan than Applicant’s family. Neither family is from the region that 
became South Sudan. Applicant’s wife’s tribe has also been subjected to genocide and 
the human rights abuses described above. Applicant and his wife knew each other in 
school. Her sister immigrated to the United States before her and became a U.S. 
citizen. Her sister sponsored Applicant’s wife to immigrate to the United States. 
Applicant and his wife reconnected in the United States, and they married in 2002. She 
became a U.S. citizen in 2008.7  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. His wife’s mother and six siblings are 
Sudanese citizens and residents. Applicant’s brother-in-law worked for the police in 
Sudan until the early 2000s. He was forced to leave the police force because of his 
ethnicity. One of his sisters-in-law works for the Sudanese government in a position that 
is unrelated to the military, intelligence, or politics. Another sister-in-law worked for 
another section of the Sudanese government until 2006. This section was also 
unrelated to the military, intelligence, or politics.8   
 
 Applicant has a close friend who works for the local police in Sudan. This friend 
aided Applicant in his escape from Sudan. He is also the go-between when Applicant 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 39-40, 54-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
4 The facts administratively noticed about Libya are set out in HE II.  
 
5 Tr. at 26-29, 58-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
6 Tr. at 30, 40, 58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
7 Tr. at 33, 48, 53-54, 66-67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
8 Tr. at 61-63, 66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
 
5 
 
sends money to his family in Sudan. He receives the money and passes it to Applicant’s 
family.9  
 
 Applicant contacts his family in Sudan about twice a month. His wife contacts her 
family about once a month. Applicant sends his family on average about $400 to $500 
per month. He stated the money is used for food, medicine, and the costs of daily living. 
His wife occasionally sends money to her family in Sudan, but not as often. Applicant 
stated his wife’s family is in a better situation than his family.10   
 
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. He owns a company in the United 
States, and he has other U.S. assets. His wife works for a large U.S. corporation. He 
greatly appreciates the freedom, rights, privileges, and opportunities provided him by 
the United States. This country is his home. He has not returned to Sudan since 1998, 
and he has no intention to move back to Sudan. He stated that the Sudanese 
government considers their former citizens who support the U.S. and U.N. efforts to end 
the violence and genocide in Sudan to be “traitors.”11 
 
 Except for short visits back to the United States, Applicant has worked in Iraq as 
a linguist for defense contractors since May 2009. He did not tell his family in Sudan 
that he is working in Iraq. Applicant submitted numerous pieces of commendatory 
material from his time serving in Iraq. He served under hazardous conditions, and he 
was highly regarded by the U.S. military personnel with whom he served. Applicant is 
proud of the service he has provided to his adopted country. He stated that he is “willing 
to serve this country as long as [he is] alive.” Applicant stated that he would report to 
security authorities any attempt to use his family against him.12  
 
 Several senior U.S. military members wrote letters praising Applicant’s bravery 
during combat operations and his excellent performance of duties. In July 2010, one 
officer wrote: 
 
I have had the pleasure of working daily with [Applicant] for the past eight 
months during a plethora of challenging operations across [Iraq]. . . . 
[Applicant’s] attention to detail, awareness of ever-changing conditions 
and dedication to his duties were instrumental to the success of my team 
during this time. . . . In short, [Applicant] is very comfortable performing 
under the stressful and changing circumstances that are found in an active 
warzone. 
 
[Applicant] served the United States [military] with bravery and distinction 
from early 2009 to July 2010. He has earned the respect of all the 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 38-39, 49-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
10 Tr. at 26, 39, 51-52, 64-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
11 Tr. at 25, 29, 37, 44-46, 72-73. 
 
12 Tr. at 25, 32-37, 41-44, 67-73; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A-D, H-J. 
 
 
6 
 
personnel on my team, and has every confidence from the chain of 
command.13 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
13 AE B. 
 
 
7 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant and his wife have numerous family members and a close friend that 
are citizens and residents of Sudan. Two of Applicant’s brothers are Sudanese citizens 
in refugee camps in Egypt and Chad. Sudan has been plagued by civil war, genocide, 
and human right’s violations, and it has sponsored terrorism. The presence of 
Applicant’s family members in Sudan, Egypt, and Chad creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, both through him 
and through his wife. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 
7(d) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
 
8 
 
  SOR ¶ 1.l alleges that Applicant sends money to his family in Sudan. That is 
evidence of Applicant’s ties of affection to his family. The security concerns raised by 
Applicant’s family in Sudan are already alleged in other SOR allegations. There are no 
independent foreign influence security concerns raised by the money transfer. SOR ¶ 
1.l is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s and his wife’s family and friend live in Sudan. Because of the nature 
of that government, its support of terrorism, and the atrocities it has helped perpetrate 
on its own people, I am unable to find AG ¶ 8(a) applicable.  
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States since 1999, and he has been a U.S. 
citizen since 2008. His wife is now also a U.S. citizen. His two children were born in the 
United States, and his wife is pregnant with their third child. Applicant owns a U.S. 
business, and his wife works for a large U.S. corporation. He has worked with U.S. 
forces in Iraq for most of the last two-plus years. A senior military officer wrote that 
Applicant served the United States military “in an active warzone” with “bravery and 
distinction.” Applicant has not revealed to his family in Sudan that he was in Iraq. He 
stated that he would report to security authorities any attempt to use his family against 
him. The Appeal Board has stated that such statements, standing alone, are of limited 
value, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner 
in the past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track 
record of complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of 
dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the 
national security.14 In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the 
Appeal Board discussed this issue: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
9 
 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
I find Applicant provided evidence of his commitment in dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances during his combat services in Iraq, and he has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in America that he can be expected to resolve 
any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s service in Iraq. I also considered the totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to Sudan, a country that has supported terrorism and has 
participated in genocide against its own people. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
 
10 
 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He stated that he would report to security 
authorities any attempt to use his family against him. The Appeal Board has held that 
“generally, an applicant’s statements, by themselves, as to what he would do in the face 
of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled to little weight. On the other 
hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States is very 
important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”15 
The complicated state of affairs in Sudan places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign ties do not pose an unacceptable security risk. 
He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
