 
. 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 10-06264  
        ) 
Applicant in Personal Appearance                 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and drug involvement. Applicant's request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) signed on March 23, 2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 On April 11, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
. 
 
2
                                                
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and H (Drug Involvement) of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR, dated May 8, 2011, in which she 
admitted all allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 6, 2011, and the case was 
assigned to me on June 15, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 27, 2011. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 17, 2011. I admitted four exhibits offered 
by the Government (GE 1-4). Applicant and one witness testified on her behalf, and she 
offered one exhibit, which I admitted as Applicant's Exhibit (AE) A. DOHA received the 
transcript on August 25, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings.  
 
Applicant is 54 years old and single, with no children. She completed college 
credits, but did not receive a degree. Since 2009, she has worked for a federal 
contractor. This is her first application for a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 16-17, 20) 
 
Applicant worked for a private company for 17 years as an independent 
contractor. She earned a gross annual salary of about $90,000. When the vice 
president she worked for moved to another company in October 2008, Applicant lost her 
position. She was unemployed for several months, and did not receive unemployment 
insurance. In February 2009, she was hired on a part-time basis as an executive 
assistant by a federal contractor at $35 per hour. From December 2009 to September 
2010, she worked full-time, subcontracted by her company to another federal 
contractor. That task ended because of her lack of a security clearance. She now works 
about quarter-time as business operations manager for her federal contractor employer. 
(GE 2 at 11; Tr. 17-23, 49) 
 
In about 2006, Applicant and a friend became partners in a business breeding 
and raising horses on a horse farm. Applicant's business partner did not have solid 
credit.  Applicant did well financially during the years she worked as the vice 
president’s assistant, and she qualified for loans. The business costs were solely in 
Applicant's name. However, her partner did not deal with Applicant in good faith (see 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented by the Department 
of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
. 
3
SOR debts alleged at 1.d, 1.f, and 1.i, discussed below) The business failed. (Tr. 24-
26, 28-29, 40) 
 
At her May 2010 security interview, Applicant stated she received consumer 
credit counseling. However, she could not provide the investigator with any further 
information on the counseling. Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in April 
2011. It includes all of the debts listed in the SOR. She did not provide documentation 
showing that it has been discharged. (GE 2 at 20; AE A) 
 
In her personal financial statement (PFS) of November 2010, Applicant listed 
net monthly income of $3,457, and expenses of $3,436, leaving a monthly remainder of 
$20. However, her bankruptcy petition of April 2011 showed a different picture of her 
financial situation, with a negative monthly net remainder of $1,112. At the hearing, 
Applicant noted that the PFS was out-of-date, and she was no longer responsible for 
ten payments listed on it. The payments amount to $2,242. Three of these debts are in 
the SOR and in her bankruptcy (1.a, 1.c, and 1.f). After deducting them, her monthly 
net remainder is $1,215. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 33-38)  
 
Applicant's debts as listed in the SOR total $120,028. They became delinquent 
between January 2009 and January 2010. The following SOR debts appear in 
Applicant's credit bureau reports of April 2010 (GE 4) and March 2011 (GE 3). 
 
Farm-related debts, totaling $15,239 (1.a, 1.d, 1.i) Applicant and her 
partner financed their horse business in part through lines of credit. The 
lines of credit at allegations 1.a and 1.i. are $8,847 and $1,392, 
respectively. Allegation 1.a refers to a line of credit for farming supplies. 
Applicant's credit report shows that this debt is disputed. (GE 3, 4) 
 
Applicant testified that her partner applied for the $1,392 line of credit by 
forging Applicant's signature. Applicant learned of the forgery after the 
judgment was filed. She informed the lender and supplied documents to 
contrast her actual signature with the forged signature. Although she 
disputes the debt, she stated in her interrogatory response that she set up 
a plan to pay $232 per month, to be deducted automatically from her bank 
account. (GE 2 at 4) She did not provide proof of payments. Applicant has 
not informed the credit reporting agencies that she disputes this debt. (GE 
2 at 13; Tr. 25) 
 
Allegation 1.d refers to a $5,000 debt owed for a tractor purchased for the 
horse farm. Applicant asked the company to repossess it because she 
could not afford the payments. When the company tried to retrieve it, 
Applicant's partner said it had been stolen. Applicant contacted local 
police and was informed that a tractor had not been reported stolen. All 
 
 
. 
 
4
                                                
three debts are included in Applicant's bankruptcy petition. (GE 2; AE A; 
Tr. 23-26, 28-29) 
 
Credit cards, totaling $54,789 (1.b, 1.c, 1.g, 1.h) Applicant responded to 
mailed solicitations for credit cards by rolling over balances from other 
credit card accounts to new ones with lower interest rates for limited 
periods of time. Despite the lower rates, she was eventually unable to 
meet her payments. The four credit card debts are included in Applicant's 
bankruptcy petition. (AE A; Tr. 26-28) 
 
Applicant stated she arranged a payment plan of $200 per month on the 
account at allegation 1.c. She did not provide documentation showing 
payments.3 As of November 2010, she planned to contact the creditor at 
allegation 1.g to arrange a payment plan. (GE 2 at 2, 4) 
 
Furniture, $17,000 (1.f) Applicant's partner had poor credit, so Applicant 
paid $10,000 for furniture for her partner’s house in another state. Her 
partner did not fulfill her promise to reimburse her. Applicant provided 
documentation that she arranged a payment plan of $200 per month in 
November 2010 that would begin in December 2010. She did not offer 
evidence that she made payments. The debt is included in Applicant's 
bankruptcy petition. (GE 2 at 3, 8; AE A; Tr. 32) 
 
Mortgage, $33,000 (1.e) Applicant purchased a condominium in her home 
state in 2005. In approximately 2009, she retained an attorney to help her 
obtain a loan modification. At her May 2010 security interview, she stated 
she was not making mortgage payments because the loan was being 
considered for a modification. In about mid-2010, her lender informed her 
it had never received a request to modify her loan. She has not made 
additional requests for loan modifications, and is waiting to learn if the   
property will be foreclosed. She has no intent to live in the condominium. 
A friend is currently living there, and Applicant is paying the homeowner 
association fees. The debt is listed in Applicant's bankruptcy, with a loan 
balance of $223,835. (GE 2 at 4, 11-12, 19; GE 3; AE A; Tr. 29-32) 
 
 
3 Applicant provided documentation related to debts not alleged in the SOR: (1) proof that she initiated 
a payment plan for a credit card account; (2) proof of an October 2010 payment made on another credit 
card account; (3) an unsubstantiated statement that she made a payment plan for a retail charge 
account in December 2010; and (4) proof of satisfaction of a judgment for $7,427 in July 2010. (GE 2 at 
3, 14, 15) 
 
 
. 
5
                                                
Applicant has used marijuana occasionally since about 1971, when she was 13 
years old. She obtained the illegal drug from friends, and used it alone at home. She 
has never grown or sold the drug. She used it every couple of months. (GE 2; Tr. 41-42) 
 
On her security clearance application, Applicant reported using marijuana until 
March 2010, the month she completed her application. At her May 2010 security 
interview, she said she used the illegal drug every few months, but she would stop 
using it in the future. When Department Counsel asked Applicant if she used marijuana 
after her May 2010 interview, she testified, “I haven’t been doing it for months now.” 
When asked again if she used it since she met with the investigator, she stated, “Oh, 
I’m sure I did since talking to the investigator. Was – but – but I haven’t, you know, in 
months now.” (GE 1. 2; Tr. 40-41) 
 
 Applicant's current supervisor testified on her behalf. He owns and operates a 
small firm that contracts with the federal government. He is Applicant's cousin. He has 
served in the Navy and worked for a federal contractor. He has held a security 
clearance since 1967. The witness was aware of the SOR allegations. He described her 
as reliable, and stated he has never seen her impaired by illegal drug use in the time 
she has worked for him. She has a strong work ethic, and does whatever is required to 
accomplish her tasks. She asked him for advice about completing her security 
clearance application, and she has been candid with him and during the security 
clearance process. (Tr. 46-54) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline H (Drug Involvement). 
 
 
 
 
8 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
. 
 
6
                                                
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. .. 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions are relevant under AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. The current SOR lists delinquent 
debts totalling more than $120,000. She filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 
 
9 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
11 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
. 
7
2011. Applicant's history demonstrates an inability or unwillingness to meet her 
financial obligations. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply.  
 
 I considered the following relevant mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant's debts are numerous and are not in the distant past. The record 
evidence does not show that they have been discharged through her bankruptcy 
petition. Her failure to make efforts to resolve most of her debts until prompted by the 
security clearance process raises questions about her reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on situations where conditions beyond an applicant’s control 
affect her ability to meet financial obligations. Applicant lost her long-standing job in 
October 2008, and was unemployed for several months. When she found employment, 
it was full-time for about nine months and quarter-time the remaining period. She also 
could not anticipate the bad acts of her partner. These events affected her finances. 
However, her unemployment was brief, and it occurred almost three years ago. AG ¶ 
20(b) requires that an applicant act reasonably in response to unforeseen 
circumstances. Applicant contacted creditors and worked out payment plans for some 
debts, However, she did not take these steps when they started to become delinquent, 
but only when she realized that delinquent debts would affect her eligibility for a 
 
 
. 
 
8
                                                
security clearance. Moreover, she did not take action against her partner that could 
have resulted in releasing her from debts stemming from the claimed fraud. AG 20(b) 
does not apply. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20 (c) and (d) require a good-faith effort to repay debts. Applicant’s 
efforts occurred primarily after being prompted by the clearance process. She told the 
security investigator that she received credit counselling, but it is unlikely it afforded her 
concrete help, as she could not provide the investigator with any information about the 
service. In April 2011, a few months before the hearing, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy petition that included all of the SOR debts. Applicant's bankruptcy petition is 
recent, and she did not supply documentation to show its progress or its discharge.  
 
 The Appeal Board has defined “good faith” as acting in a way that shows 
“reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” In the same 
decision, the Board held that, “Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely 
show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to 
claim the benefit of [this mitigating condition].8 Applicant’s assumption of excessive 
debt led her to a situation where, ultimately, her only recourse was bankruptcy. 
Although it is a legitimate option to resolve overwhelming debt, it does not qualify under 
the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence as a good-faith effort. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed two SOR debts related to her horse business. Her credit 
reports note that the line of credit at allegation 1.a is disputed. She testified that she did 
not formally dispute the judgment at allegation 1.i with the credit reporting agencies. 
She did inform the creditor, and supplied it with documents showing that her signature 
on the loan application was forged. AG ¶ 20(e) applies in part. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 The security concern about drug involvement is that: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. AG 
¶ 24. 
 
 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004), quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. 
Bd. June 4, 2001). 
 
. 
9
 The record evidence raises two disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug 
abuse), and AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). 
Applicant both possessed and used an illegal drug on an intermittent basis from 1971 
until 2010. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) apply. 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana in 2010 was recent. It was not infrequent, as 
Applicant used marijuana every few months for almost 40 years. In addition, she used 
it, not in unusual circumstances, but in her own home. Her use of illegal drugs raises 
serious doubts about her judgment and reliability. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant testified that she does not intend to use marijuana in the future. 
However, her use of marijuana after telling the security agent that she would not use it, 
undermines her claim that she will abstain. Given these facts, and Applicant's long 
history of marijuana use, I cannot confidently conclude that she will avoid marijuana 
use in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) cannot be applied. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
. 
 
10
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Although a mature adult of 57 years, Applicant has not demonstrated reliability 
in handling her financial obligations or in her long-standing use of an illegal drug. Her 
debts became delinquent approximately two years ago, and they still appear on her 
recent credit reports. After completing a security clearance application in 2010, she 
was well aware that her debts were security-relevant. She did take some steps to 
resolve her debts by contacting several creditors in November 2010. But she failed to 
provide documentation related to most of the payment plans she described. In April 
2011, she filed a bankruptcy petition. Applicant's recent bankruptcy petition does not 
outweigh her inaction over the past several years.  
 
 Applicant used an illegal drug for approximately four decades. Her long history 
and recent use of marijuana present a serious security concern. She was using 
marijuana last year, in 2010, at the age of 56, about the time of her security interview. 
She told the interviewer that she would not use it in the future. Her admitted use after 
that interview is especially troubling: She was on notice that illegal drug use was an 
issue for security clearance holders because she had completed a security clearance 
application in March 2010 that asked about illegal drug use; and she had met with an 
investigator in April 2010, who specifically asked her about her illegal drug use. Yet 
after this interview, Applicant used marijuana. She placed her own desires above those 
of the Government. Applicant's actions fail to demonstrate the good judgment and 
trustworthiness required of those who are granted access to classified information. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
11
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
