  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 10-04533 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owes $53,000 in past due federal taxes. He owes approximately 
$6,000 on four other delinquent accounts. His monthly expenses exceed his monthly 
income. He has failed to rebut or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns under financial 
considerations. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to sensitive information and eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On November 4, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
1 
 On December 16, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On April 28, 2011, I was assigned the case. On June 3, 2011 DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 29, 2011. On June 10, 2011, an Amended Notice 
of Hearing was issued changing the start time of the hearing.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 8, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through I, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information. No additional information was received. On 
July 9, 2011, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.g, 1.i, 
1.j, and 1.k. He neither admitted nor denied the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.h. The remaining 
debts he admitted. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old network administrator and computer help-desk 
technician who has worked for a defense contractor since July 2006, and seeks to 
maintain a position of public trust. (Tr. 54) Applicant called no witnesses other than 
himself. He submitted numerous emails attesting to his good work performance. (Ex. H 
and I) He received employee excellence awards for his work performance in November 
2008 and January 2009. (Ex. J) He has completed a number of DoD training sessions 
and completed the requirements to be a Microsoft certified professional. (Ex. J) 
 
 Applicant’s current monthly gross salary is $2,800. He currently lives with his 
mother who suffers from HIV. He helps pay for his mother’s medicine, which is 
expensive. His mother pays the rent. (Tr. 81) In September 2010, he completed a 
personal financial statement that showed his monthly expenses exceeded his income. 
His net monthly income was $927, monthly expenses were $1,371, and monthly debt 
payments were $385. On the day of the hearing, he had less than $10 in his checking 
account and savings account. (Tr. 85)  
 
Applicant has three children: a daughter (age 3) born in June 2008, a daughter 
(age 18) born in January 1993, and a step-son (age 26) born in July 1985. (Ex. 1, 5) 
Although separated, Applicant has been married to the same woman throughout his 
financial problems. A hearing regarding Applicant’s child support for his oldest daughter 
had been set for mid-June 2011, but was continued until August 3, 2011. (Ex. C) His 
oldest daughter, now age 18, lives with her grandmother; however, the state is sending 
the child support ($547) he pays each month to his daughter’s mother. (Tr. 65) Because 
the mother fails to send the money to the grandmother, Applicant and the grandmother 
have brought suit to have the money sent to the individual raising the child, i.e., the 
grandmother. (Tr. 35) He is current on his child support obligations. (Tr. 46) He pays 
$300 a month for child support for his youngest daughter. (Tr. 81)  
2 
 
 In 1997 or 1998, Applicant’s two full time jobs working as a computer local area 
network (LAN) administrator ended. (Ex. 3) He remained unemployed until 2002. He 
had worked for the companies for ten years and had accumulated sizable 401(k) 
retirement funds ($260,000). (Tr. 55) He used his 401(k) funds for living expenses. At 
the time he withdrew the funds, he was unaware of the tax ramifications resulting from 
his use of the funds. (Tr. 19) Because he was not 59 and one half years of age when he 
withdrew the funds, the funds were subject to penalty in addition to being ordinary 
income in the year used. In August 2003, the IRS entered a $40,194 federal tax lien 
against him (SOR 1 f). As of October 2008, $53,385 was owed for past due taxes. (Ex. 
E)  
 
Also in 1997 or 1998, Applicant and his spouse filed for Chapter 13, Wage 
Earner’s Plan, bankruptcy protection. The bankruptcy was dismissed after three or four 
months because the required payments were not being made. He could not make the 
payments because of his wife’s mental illness, his loss of employment, and his wife’s 
unemployment. (Ex. 3) From the mid 1980s until the 1990s, his wife was hospitalized 
three times suffering from schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. (Tr. 33) His wife’s credit 
card over spending was a manifestation of the disorder. He attributes the loss of a job 
due to her stalking. (Tr. 33) In June 2000, he and his wife separated. (Ex. 1)  
 
In 2000, Applicant’s home went into foreclosure. (Tr. 75) He filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection in an attempt to prevent the foreclosure. (Tr. 87) In January 2001, 
the bankruptcy was dismissed and the home sold as part of the foreclosure. (Tr. 17)  
 
In 2005 or 2006, Applicant had separated from his wife and was living with a 
male roommate. Each individual was to pay half of the monthly rent. Applicant allowed 
his step-son to live with him and did not charge his step-son rent. This resulted in his 
roommate refusing to pay his half of the $398 monthly rent. (Ex. 3) Applicant then paid 
the entire amount of rent each month. (Tr. 47) Two months prior to the end of the year’s 
lease, Applicant notified the property manager that he had to leave because his 
roommate was refusing to pay his share of the rent and he could no longer pay the full 
amount. After he left, his roommate continued to live in the apartment. (Tr. 48) His ex-
roommate was later incarcerated. (Tr. 88) He has received notice that the landlord is 
attempting to collect $3,190 from him for past-due rent (SOR 1. d). In March 2010, 
during a personal subject interview, he said he intended to contact the apartment 
complex to resolve this debt.  
 
Applicant and his wife entered into an agreement to purchase a home schooling 
curriculum for his two children. He believes the $841 debt on this is his wife’s 
responsibility. (Tr. 3)  
 
Applicant’s 2008 income was $28,644. (Ex. D) In 2009, his income was $34,071 
and in 2010, his income was $36,400. For tax year 2008, 2009, and 2010, his 
anticipated tax refunds were intercepted and applied to his tax obligation. (Ex. F, Ex. 3, 
D)  
3 
 
In September 2010, Applicant paid a $400 telephone service debt. (Ex. G-2) The 
debt was incurred due to early termination of the service. (Ex. 3) In November 2010, his 
1995 Honda Accord was stolen. (Tr. 84) On June 24, 2011, five days before the 
hearing, Applicant retained a law firm to assist him in filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection. (Ex. B) As part of the bankruptcy filing, he has attended financial counseling 
sessions. (Tr. 40)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
January 2001 
 
 Applicant entered into bankruptcy attempting 
to prevent the foreclosure on his home, which 
failed. 
b Collection account for 
failing to return cable 
box. 
$569 
 
Account has been settled. Applicant obtained 
the cable equipment from his wife and 
returned it to the cable company. $155 
remains due to the cable company for the 
debt listed in SOR 1.c. (Tr. 43, Ex. G-3) 
c Collection account for 
the cable bill.  
$191 
 
Applicant’s cable bill balance is $155 (Tr. 44, 
Ex. G-3)  
d Collection account for 
unpaid rent.  
$3,190 Unpaid. Applicant has made inquiries about 
this debt. (Tr. 48) 
e Collection agency 
collecting on a 
delinquent credit card 
account.  
 
$1,695 Paying. Creditor agreed to accept $25 per 
month. Applicant has been making monthly 
payments since September 2010. (Tr. 38, Ex. 
G-1)  
f Internal Revenue 
Service tax lien 
entered in August 
2003. 
$53,000 Unpaid. No agreement has been reached. 
Applicant’s yearly tax refunds have been 
intercepted, but no repayment agreement has 
been established with the IRS. 
g Collection account. $76 Paid in September 2010. (Tr. 49) 
h Telephone service 
collection account.  
$2,218 Unpaid. Applicant does not believe this is his 
debt. He thinks his wife may have opened it 
in his name. (Tr. 50) He has not contacted 
the creditor. (Tr. 50)  
 
 
4 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
i Gas utility service at 
his home, which went 
to foreclosure.  
$397 Unpaid.  
j Telephone service 
collection account. 
$246 Applicant asserts this debt was paid and he 
currently has telephone service with the 
successor-in-interest of the company. (Tr. 51)  
k Collection account for 
home schooling 
course.  
$841 Applicant disputes this is his bill. He believes 
his wife is solely responsible for this debt. (Tr. 
52)  
 Total SOR debt  $9,423 This amount does not include past due taxes. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of sensitive information is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding confidential information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one 
aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
6 
inconsistent with holding a position of trust. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant has resorted to 
bankruptcy protection three times in 1997 or 1998, 2000, and most recently in 2011. 
The first two Chapter 13 bankruptcies were dismissed shortly after being filed because 
he could not make the required payments. He owes approximately $6,000 on four 
delinquent accounts and owes $53,000 in past due federal income tax. His monthly 
expenses exceed his monthly income. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant shows limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) and 20(d) for financial 
considerations. His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. Since monthly 
expenses exceed his monthly income, he is unlikely to be able to do much more than to 
address the account on which he pays $25 monthly (SOR 1.e). If he follows through on 
filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, the debts other than his tax liability may be 
discharged. It is uncertain how his federal income tax obligation will be affected by a 
bankruptcy filing.  
 
7 
The mitigating factor listed in AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. His debts are 
numerous, and since they remain unpaid, they are recent. Since his monthly expenses 
exceed his monthly income, his financial problems are unlikely to continue.  
 
The mitigating factor listed in AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. In 1998, Applicant was 
laid off from two jobs and his wife suffers from medical problems. Additionally, in June 
2000, he separated from his wife. All of these were conditions beyond his control that 
adversely impacted his finances. Even though these factors were beyond his control 
and added to his financial problems, his income is such that his financial problems will 
continue for the foreseeable future.  
 
In preparation for filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief, Applicant has attended 
financial counseling. What impact that counseling has had on him is unknown. Merely 
attending counseling without a change in the handling of his finances is insufficient for 
AG ¶ 20(c) to apply.  
 
For AG & 20(d) to apply there must be a good-faith effort to repay the creditors. 
This is evident with the debt in SOR 1.e ($1,695) on which he pays $25 monthly. This 
also applies to the returned cable box (SOR 1.b, $569), the $76 debt listed in SOR 1.g, 
the $246 phone bill listed in SOR 1.j, and the home study course his wife obtained listed 
in SOR 1.k ($841). I find for Applicant as to these debts. I also find for him as to SOR 
1.a, the bankruptcy filing caused by his and his wife’s unemployment.  
 
 The mitigating condition in AG & 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has 
failed to document any reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position of 
trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
8 
9 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The largest of Applicant’s debts, the 
unpaid federal income tax, was incurred when he used his 401(k) retirement account to 
pay living expenses after being laid off from the two jobs he held for ten years. Although 
he did not understand the tax ramifications of withdrawing this money when he did so, 
the $53,000 tax debt remains unpaid.  
 
Applicant leads a frugal lifestyle. He is making sure his child support is paid as 
agreed so that his children are properly cared for. He appears to want to pay his past 
due obligations, but lacks the income to do so. The issue is not simply whether all his 
debts are paid—it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a position of trust. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) At his current income, his 
expenses exceed his income. This is unlikely to change in the near future. Because of 
the large unpaid tax debt and his monthly expenses exceeding his monthly income, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I conclude he has not mitigated 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, F, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  Against Applicant   
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to information and occupying a public trust 
position is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
