1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-08308
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has a history
of financial problems or difficulties (multiple delinquent debts). His indebtedness
appears to be related to a failed business and marriage. He just recently sought relief
from his indebtedness via a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which is now pending. At this
point, it is simply too soon to tell if the pending Chapter 7 bankruptcy case will be the
end of his financial problems or is a harbinger of things to come. Accordingly, as
explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Exhibits 2–6. 2
 Tr. 37–44. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 10,1
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations.
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to me April 28, 2011. The hearing took place June 6, 2011. The transcript (Tr.) was
received June 15, 2011.  
The record was kept open for 30 days, to July 6, 2011, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to submit additional documentary information about his Chapter 7
bankruptcy case. He made a timely submission, and without objections, those matters
are marked and admitted as Exhibit B.   
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged 32 delinquent debts ranging in amounts from $53 to $11,959
for a total of approximately $104,000. Applicant’s answers were mixed, with both
denials and admissions. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. In addition, the
following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is seeking an
industrial security clearance for employment as an electronics technician. He is recently
divorced from his first wife. The marriage produced two children, ages 14 and 10, both
of whom live with their mother. Applicant pays child support and has reduced a sizeable
arrearage down to the current level of about $1,250. 
Applicant has a problematic financial history (multiple delinquent debts), which he
does not, in general, dispute.  He attributes his indebtedness to a failed trucking2
company he owned and operated during the five-year period of 2003–2007.  The3
company was never profitable, and then in 2006, Applicant and his wife separated.
 Exhibit 1. 4
 Tr. 48–65. 5
 Exhibit A. 6
 Exhibit B. 7
3
Overwhelmed, his business declined further and he terminated the company’s operation
in about August 2007. 
That same year, Applicant moved across country and relocated to his current
domicile. The move resulted in a period of brief unemployment, as he began working as
an electronics technician for a defense contractor in November 2007. He worked there
through December 2007, when the contract was awarded to another company, and he
followed the contract, beginning employment with this defense contractor in January
2008. He remained employed there until November 2009, when he accepted a job offer
with the defense contractor that is currently sponsoring him for a clearance. He worked
there for less than 60 days, when he was released or put on leave without pay pending
resolution of his security clearance, for which he completed an application in February
2010.  He was then unemployed until June 2011, when he began another job as an4
electronics technician. During this period, he received unemployment compensation of
about $1,700 monthly. 
At hearing, Applicant admitted nearly all the debts alleged in the SOR.  He took5
issue with some of the amounts due, asserting balances had been reduced, and he
claimed one or two accounts may be duplicates. But he did not present any
documentary evidence to support his assertions or to show that he paid, settled, or
otherwise resolved the debts. He did present a June 2, 2011 letter from a bankruptcy
attorney in which the attorney explained that his law office had been retained for the
purposes of preparing and filing a Chapter 7 case on Applicant’s behalf within one to
two weeks.  6
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant presented paperwork related to his
Chapter 7 case, to include the petition, which was filed June 28, 2011.  The petition lists7
$17,000 in assets and $71,061 in liabilities on Schedule E for unsecured priority claims
and on Schedule F for unsecured nonpriority claims (unsecured debts). The Schedule E
claims consist of $2,055 in back taxes owed to the IRS and $1,250 owed to a child-
support agency. The Schedule F lists claims for 31 creditors for $67,756. When the
record closed, Applicant’s Chapter 7 case was pending with the bankruptcy court.  
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
4
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 19
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an20
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  21
 AG ¶ 19(a).  22
 AG ¶ 19(c). 23
5
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant19
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline20
F is:
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  21
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The evidence raises security concerns because it indicates
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial22
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish23
these two disqualifying conditions. 
6
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:  
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
I have considered all the mitigating conditions, and none, individually or in
combination, are sufficient to overcome and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s
problematic financial history is due to the failure of his trucking company. That failure
was, in part, connected to his failed marriage. Since ending the business and marriage,
he relocated and resumed employment, but experienced a period of unemployment
during 2009–2011. These circumstances explain why he incurred the debt, the
circumstances were largely beyond his control, and they are unlikely to recur.
Nevertheless, since 2007, he has taken few measurable steps toward putting his
financial house in good order. He did not present any reliable documentary evidence
showing that he paid, settled, or otherwise resolved the debts in question. And he has
only recently sought relief via the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which is now pending.
Under binding DOHA Appeal Board caselaw, obtaining relief via a Chapter 7 bankruptcy
case is not a “good-faith effort” to resolve one’s debts. Assuming the bankruptcy court
grants him a discharge of his debts, what is missing here is a post-bankruptcy track
record of financial responsibility and living within his means. At this point, it is simply too
soon to tell if the pending Chapter 7 bankruptcy case will be the end of his financial
problems or is a harbinger of things to come. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9). 24
7
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
consideration to the nine factors of the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude24
that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.ff: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.            
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
