 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-05657 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists five delinquent debts totaling 
$77,676. He did not provide proof of any payments to his SOR creditors. He failed to 
make sufficient progress in resolving his SOR debts, and financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated at this time. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (Item 4). On 
February 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On February 21, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated May 31, 2011, was provided to him on June 13, 2011. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on August 3, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. His 
admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old member of a college adjunct faculty and has held this 
position since early 2005.3 He has been a senior engineer for a government contractor 
since 2004. He earned his first Ph.D. in 2004 and his second Ph.D. in 2010 in statistics. 
He has never served in the military. He married his spouse in 2007. He does not have 
any children.     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists five delinquent debts totaling $77,676: 1.a ($13,424); 1.b 
($6,718); 1.c ($18,106); 1.d ($36,388); and 1.e ($3,040). (Item 1) On February 21, 2011, 
he admitted responsibility for these five debts in his SOR response. (Item 3)  
 
On April 9, 2010, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant, and he admitted responsibility for the five SOR debts, although 
lesser amounts were owed to the creditors at the time of his OPM interview.4 Applicant 
admitted he had not had any recent contact with any of the creditors. He explained that 
                                            
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated June 2, 2011, and Applicant’s receipt is dated June 13, 
2011. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit 
information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s security clearance 
application. (Item 4) 
 
4 Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s summary of OPM 
interview. (Item 7) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
he needed to provide for his mother and his spouse. His spouse had extensive dental 
procedures and other medical issues. He said his finances were stable, and he intended 
to pay his debts. Applicant and his spouse have net monthly income of $6,000. Their 
monthly expenses are $5,050, and their total monthly debt payments are $550. He has 
a monthly net remainder of approximately $400. 
 
On August 24, 2010, Applicant responded to DOHA-issued interrogatories.5 He 
admitted the five SOR debts; however, he did not provide any information about his 
efforts to pay his SOR creditors. His personal financial statement was consistent with 
the statement he provided to the OPM investigator. He added that he has $221,000 in 
student loans that are currently on deferred status. His monthly student loan payments 
will be over $1,000 per month, and will exceed his net remainder by about $500 per 
month. He did not describe any payments to any medical or dental creditors. 
 
The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his 
receipt to submit information. Applicant did not provide proof of any payment plans or 
payments to the SOR creditors. There is no evidence of financial counseling. There is 
no evidence of reportable criminal offenses, drug abuse, or alcohol-related misconduct.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
                                            
5 Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s responses to 
DOHA interrogatories. (Item 8) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his responses to DOHA interrogatories, and his SOR response. 
Applicant’s SOR lists five delinquent debts totaling $77,676. His SOR debts became 
delinquent at least a year ago. The Government established the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants very limited application of AG 
¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d).6 There is no evidence of financial counseling. He showed 
                                            
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
some good faith when he admitted responsibility for his SOR debts in his SOR 
response, to the OPM investigator, and in response to DOHA interrogatories. 
Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by insufficient income, his wife’s medical 
and dental issues, and the necessity that he provide financial assistance to his mother. 
However, Applicant’s financial circumstances have been relatively stable for more than 
12 months, and he has not provided sufficient information about efforts to start paying 
his SOR creditors to fully establish any mitigating conditions. He did not explain why he 
has not been using some of his monthly remainder to pay his delinquent debts. He did 
not describe how he is reducing his monthly expenses, which would allow him to have 
more money available each month to start paying his SOR creditors.  
 
Applicant did not establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
The file lacks proof that he maintained contact with all of his creditors.7 There are no 
receipts or account statements from creditors, establishing any payments to his SOR 
creditors. There is insufficient evidence that his financial problem is being resolved and 
is under control. The file lacks evidence that he has acted responsibly on any of his 
SOR debts.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                                                                                                             
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his access to classified information. Applicant is a 38-year-old adjunct 
faculty member of a college, and senior engineer for a government contractor. He 
earned two Ph.Ds. He is sufficiently mature to understand and comply with his security 
responsibilities. He deserves some credit for volunteering to support the U.S. 
Government as an employee of a Department of Defense contractor. There is every 
indication that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. There is no evidence 
that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. Applicant’s financial situation was 
damaged by his spouse’s medical and dental problems, and he had insufficient income 
to address his delinquent debts. I give Applicant substantial credit for admitting 
responsibility for all of his SOR debts. He has been honest about his failure to address 
his financial plight. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Applicant’s SOR lists five delinquent debts totaling 
$77,676. Applicant’s employment has been stable for several years. He has a monthly 
remainder of about $500, and, if he reduced his standard of living and expenses, he 
could increase his net funds available to address his SOR debts. He did not provide any 
documentation showing attempts to establish payment plans. When he begins to make 
payments on his student loans, the financial stress on Applicant will increase, making it 
less likely that he will have the income to address his SOR debts. There is no evidence 
that any SOR creditors have received any payments, and no convincing evidence is in 
the file that he will successfully address his SOR debts in the near future. Applicant has 
failed to make sufficient progress resolving his delinquent SOR debts to establish his 
financial responsibility.     
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
