 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00345 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
August 31, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has one sister 
and two brothers residing in Saudi Arabia. His mother and two other sisters reside in 
Egypt. His foreign family members raised a security concern under Foreign Influence. 
He mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns by demonstrating he has deep 
and longstanding loyalties to the U.S. He is also alleged to have a history of 
indebtedness including two debts in the approximate amount of $14,207, raising 
security concerns under Financial Considerations. Applicant mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns because the debts were caused by unforeseen 
circumstances beyond his control, and he has acted responsibly with respect to his 
debts. His debts are now satisfied. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F, Financial Considerations, and B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken 
 
2 
 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 5, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on June 6, 2011, scheduling the hearing for June 23, 2011. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
7, which were admitted without objection. The Government requested administrative 
notice be taken of certain facts relating to Egypt and Saudi Arabia as contained in 
Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant had no objection and I took administrative 
notice of the documents. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. On June 29, 2011, 
Applicant submitted one additional exhibit, AE F. Department Counsel indicated it had 
no objection and AE F was admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on July 11, 2011.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR issued to 
Applicant as follows: 
 
 1. Delete SOR subparagraph 1.a and replace it with a new subparagraph 1.a to 
read as follows: 
 
a. You have one sister and two brothers who are residents of Saudi 
Arabia. 
 
2. Add SOR subparagraph 1.b to read as follows: 
 
b. Your mother and two sisters reside in Egypt. 
 
Applicant had no objection to the amendments and I granted the motion. (Tr. 91-92.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is currently laid-
off, pending his security clearance adjudication. He has worked for his current employer 
since November 2008. He has been married three times. His first marriage was from 
1985 to 2008, when they divorced. He had four children with his first wife. In 2009, his 
first wife passed away. His second marriage occurred in 2008 and lasted for eight 
months, when they divorced. He married his third and current wife in March 2011. (GE 
1; AE A; Tr. 93-95.) 
 
 
3 
 
DOHA alleged under Guideline B, Foreign Influence that Applicant has one sister 
and two brothers who are residents of Saudi Arabia, and his mother and two sisters 
reside in Egypt. Applicant admits these allegations. He also testified that he has one 
sister that resides in Jordan.1 (SOR; GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 75-92.) 
 
Applicant was born in Egypt to parents who had fled from the former Palestine. 
They were stateless people and had few rights in Egypt. They were given no citizenship 
rights in Egypt such as a public education, health care, or a right to work. (GE 1; Tr. 40-
41.) 
 
When Applicant and his siblings were able, they each left Egypt and went to 
Saudi Arabia in pursuit of work. Saudi Arabia has a system, called “Al Kafeel” which 
permits foreign workers to make a good living in Saudi Arabia, but also imposes strict 
rules on the workers. This system requires workers to have a sponsor. Workers may not 
move, travel, or seek medical treatment without permission from their sponsor. 
Applicant worked in Saudi Arabia under this system beginning in 1983, until his contract 
was canceled and he lost his sponsor in 1992. Of his six siblings, his two brothers and 
one sister still remain in Saudi Arabia working under this system. Applicant returned to 
Egypt, but could not work. (Tr. 40-46.) 
 
Seeking a better life for himself and his four children, Applicant immigrated to the 
United States on December 16, 1995. He sought political asylum in the U.S. based 
upon his lack of rights in Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Asylum was granted on September 
14, 1997. (AE A; Tr. 41-47.) Applicant testified about his decision to immigrate. He 
stated:  
 
I couldn’t live in this kind of environment. Everything is against religion. 
Everything is against - - - our cultures are different. I wanted to raise my 
kids in a healthy environment. That’s why I took the action, and I moved to 
the United States. . . It was the first time I felt respect. (Tr. 42.) 
 
Applicant had no family or contacts when he moved to the U.S. Two weeks after 
he arrived in the U.S., he started a candy business to support himself and his family. He 
worked at his business for three years until the economy experienced a downfall in 
2000. He had to close the business and file Chapter 7 bankruptcy due to economic 
hardship. Since then Applicant has worked in various positions including “a sensitive 
position” for a water department. (Answer; Tr. 43-44, 63-64.) 
 
He became a U.S. citizen in March 2008. He testified that he is loyal to the U.S. It 
was the U.S. that gave him his rights. He is now free to express his opinions and have 
opportunities to explain himself, such as the instant hearing. These rights were denied 
in Saudi Arabia and Egypt. He testified he would be willing bear arms against Egypt or 
Saudi Arabia on behalf of the U.S. In 2008, he was hired by his present employer to 
work with the U.S. Multinational Security Transition Team for in Iraq as a translator. He 
                                                          
1 The SOR failed to allege any security concerns with respect to his sister in Jordan.  
 
4 
 
was in Iraq for two and a half years, serving alongside many high-level military 
members. (GE 1; Tr. 40-53.) 
 
His immediately family includes this four adult children and his wife. He is very 
proud of his children and has raised them as Americans. They celebrate all U.S. 
holidays. One of his children recently graduated from a state university with a degree in 
civil engineering, another works for an American bank and is studying accounting. His 
third child is in school studying economics. His fourth child is studying psychology. All 
are in the United States. (GE 1; Tr. 95.) 
 
Applicant has a large extended family. His two brothers and one sister are in 
Saudi Arabia. His oldest brother works as a pharmacist and his other brother is 
businessman. They both make a lot of money. His sister is retired from her former 
position as a teacher at a university in Saudi Arabia. Applicant differs himself from his 
siblings in Saudi Arabia. He testified that instead of focusing on money as his brothers 
did; Applicant has chosen to focus on the future of his children. He came to the U.S. to 
provide a better life for them. He only contacts his siblings three times a year, on 
holidays, to wish them well. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 44-46, 53-54, 57-59, 78-80, 87.) 
 
Applicant’s mother and two sisters reside in Egypt. They all reside together in the 
home Applicant’s father owned. Applicant’s father is deceased. One of his sisters was a 
teacher in Saudi Arabia before returning to Egypt to care for their mother. His other 
sister returned from Saudi Arabia to live with their mother after her husband passed 
away. Applicant sent this sister small amounts of financial support a few times when her 
husband was sick and unable to work. He has not sent her money since 2009. He 
speaks to them by phone three times per year on holidays. (Tr. 55-58, 80-87.) When 
asked what he would do if the welfare of his mother was threatened, he replied: 
 
But my mother lives with two sisters and the closest funds for her in Saudi 
Arabia not in America. So, I am not able to do anything for her, and I 
should think in a quiet way and the right way that if it’s out of my hands, I 
cannot do anything for her. The best thing I can do is to report that with 
people who are responsible or who knows how to deal with this situation. 
(Tr. 85-86.) 
 
DOHA alleged under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, that Applicant filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2001, and that he is indebted to two creditors in the 
approximate amount of $14,207. Applicant admitted these allegations in his Answer. 
(SOR; Answer.) 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on or about August 24, 2000. He disclosed 
approximately $54,189 in unsecured debts. Applicant testified that each of the debts 
related to his candy business. In 2000 his business experienced an economic downturn. 
He was new to the business environment and had little experience on protecting the 
continuity of his business. His debt was discharged in August 2001.2 After closing his 
                                                          
2 The SOR alleges that the debt was discharged “August 2010.” This is clearly a typographical error. He 
credit report reflects the Chapter 7 bankrupts was discharged in August 2001. 
 
5 
 
business, Applicant pursued a master’s degree that included studying marketing, 
finance, business analysis, operations management, accounting, and statistics; the 
skills he though he needed to learn should he want to lead a successful business in the 
future. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 4-GE 7; AE B; Tr. 43-44, 63.)  
 
Applicant’s two debts on the SOR are both for repossessed vehicles for which 
Applicant co-signed. The first debt of $9,624 was a vehicle he co-signed for with one of 
his sons. His son was to be responsible for making the payments, but defaulted on the 
loan. Applicant presented documentation that established he satisfied this debt. The 
second debt was a vehicle loan he co-signed with his first wife during the course of their 
marriage. The debt was assigned to his first wife as part of their divorce. The vehicle 
was repossessed. She passed away in 2009, prior to being able to satisfy this debt. 
Applicant presented documentation he fulfilled this financial obligation. Applicant’s most 
recent credit reports show both accounts are “paid.” (GE 1; GE 2; GE 4-GE 7; AE B- AE 
D; Tr. 67-74.) 
 
Applicant’s credit reports show no other delinquent accounts. He testified he is 
current on all of his credit cards. He has substantial savings to see him through his 
current period of unemployment and is actively seeking alternative positions. (GE 7; Tr. 
96-98.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by the Deputy Director he worked for in Iraq. His 
Deputy Director indicated Applicant “has done an exceptional job as the senior linguist 
and cultural advisor.” The Deputy Director recommended that Applicant’s level of 
security clearance be upgraded. Similarly, his Operations Officer noted that “his high 
education, critical thinking, and command of English and Arabic have made significant 
contributions.” Both recommended him without reservations. Applicant also presented 
copies of numerous certificates he had been awarded for outstanding service. Past 
employers submitted reference letters that attested to Applicant’s honesty, 
responsibility, and excellent reputation. (AE A.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Egypt. (HE I.) Egypt is 
the most populous country in the Arab world and the second-most populous on the 
African Continent. It is a republic with a strong executive and a developing economy. In 
October of 1981, Islamic extremists assassinated President al-Sadat. Mubarek, his Vice 
President, was elected to succeed him.3 
  
 Egypt is a strong military and strategic partner of the United States. The United 
States and Egypt enjoy a strong and friendly relationship based on shared mutual 
interest in Middle East peace and stability, revitalizing the Egyptian economy, 
strengthening trade relations, and promoting regional security. Egypt played a key role 
                                                          
3 In February 2011, Hosni Mubarak resigned after thirty years of ruling Egypt. At this time, it is too early to 
tell what effects, if any, this change will have on selections and elections of new Egyptian leaders and the 
stabilization of Egypt’s political, economic, and social institutions. At the present time, it is too soon to 
make reliable predictions as to how Egypt’s relations with its neighbors and Western allies will progress. 
Both parties were given the opportunity to address this regime change, but neither chose to do so. (Tr. 
13-19.) 
 
6 
 
during the 1990-1991 Gulf crisis. The Egyptian contingent was the third-largest in the 
coalition forces, after the U.S. and the U.K. Yet, even taking into account these mutual 
interests and military cooperation, the Egyptian-U.S. relationship has gradually 
deteriorated over the last decade. 
 
 Egypt has suffered from numerous terrorist attacks. These attacks generally 
coincide with holidays and occur near tourist sites. Major terrorist attacks, where 
foreigners have either been killed, injured or kidnapped, have occurred most recently in 
July 2005, April 2006, September 2008, and February 2009. Americans have been the 
victims of some of these terrorist attacks within Egypt. 
 
 In April 2009, the Egyptian government uncovered a 49-person Hezbollah cell 
clandestinely operating in Egypt. Hezbollah is designated as a foreign terrorist 
organization and is considered by the United States to be the most technically-capable 
terrorist group in the world. Prior to September 11, 2001, Hezbollah was responsible for 
more American deaths than any other terrorist group, including the suicide truck 
bombings of the U.S. Embassy and U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut in 1983, and the U.S. 
Embassy annex in Beirut in 1984, and the 1985 hijacking of TWA flight 847, during 
which a U.S. Navy diver was murdered. Criminal networks that may be associated with 
terrorist groups in the region, including Hezbollah, have used tunnels located in Egypt to 
smuggle humans, weapons, and other contraband into Israel and the Gaza Strip. In 
addition to terrorism, extremist activity in certain areas of Egypt has created instability 
and public disorder. 
 
 The State Department notes that Egypt’s human rights record is poor and serious 
abuses continue in many areas. Problems include: limitations on the right of citizens to 
change their government, torture, arbitrary arrest, and executive branch limits and 
pressure on the judiciary. The government’s respect for freedoms of association and 
religion remained poor, and the government continued to restrict nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs). The government partially restricted freedom of expression. In 
2008, the U.S. Congress passed legislation that withheld U.S. financial assistance until 
the Secretary of State certified that Egypt had taken concrete steps in certain vital 
areas, including improving its human rights record and curbing smuggling along the 
border with Gaza. The former Secretary of State had to exercise a waiver of these 
conditions in order to authorize the release of financial assistance to Egypt. Pending 
legislation before the current U.S. Congress calls on the Egyptian Government to, 
among other things, end all forms of harassment, including judicial measures, the 
detention of media professionals and, more generally, human rights defenders and 
activists calling for reforms. 
  
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Saudi Arabia. (HE II.) 
The central institution of the Saudi Arabian Government is the monarchy ruled by the Al 
Saud family, and there are no political parties or national elections. The Qu’ran is the 
constitution of the country and Saudi Arabia is governed on the basis of Islamic Law 
(Shari’a). 
 
 
7 
 
Despite generally good relations, the United States remains concerned about 
human rights conditions in Saudi Arabia. Principal human rights issues include abuse of 
prisoners and incommunicado detention; prohibitions or severe restrictions on freedom 
of speech, press, peaceful assembly and association, and religion; denial of the right of 
citizens to change their government; systematic discrimination against women and 
ethnic and religious minorities; and suppression of workers’ rights. Saudi Arabia has a 
religious police known as the Mutawwa'in (MOI) or the Committee for the Promotion of 
Virtue and Prevention of Vice (CPVPV) which reports directly to the king. The religious 
police monitor public behavior to enforce strict adherence to conservative Islamic 
norms. 
 
In Saudi Arabia, the law guarantees the inviolability of homes and the privacy of 
correspondence. Despite these provisions, custom officials routinely opened mail and 
shipments to search for contraband, including material deemed pornographic or that 
appeared to be non-Sunni Islamic material. The authorities also opened mail and used 
informants and wiretaps in internal security and criminal matters. Informants and, in 
some districts, an informal system of ward bosses, reported to the MOI seditious ideas, 
anti-government activity, or behavior contrary to Islam in their neighborhoods.  
 
The United States and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about regional 
security, oil exports and imports, and sustainable development. However, Saudi 
Arabia’s relations with the United States were strained after the September 11, 2001, 
terrorist attacks in which 15 of the suicide bombers were Saudi citizens. Additionally, on 
May 12, 2003, suicide bombers killed 35 people, including nine Americans, in attacks at 
three housing compounds for Westerners in Riyadh. On June 9, 2004, and June 12, 
2004, terrorists killed two Americans. On June 18, 2004, terrorists kidnapped and 
beheaded another American. On December 6, 2004, terrorists attacked the U.S. 
Consulate in Jeddah, killing five consulate employees. 
 
A Travel Warning is in effect for Saudi Arabia due to concerns about the 
possibility of terrorist activity directed against American citizens and interests. Terrorist 
groups continue to target housing compounds and other establishments where 
westerners may be located. These terrorist groups may employ a wide variety of tactics 
and also may target Saudi Government facilities and economic/commercial targets 
within the Kingdom. 
 
 Individuals and organizations based in Saudi Arabia have been designated by 
the U.S. Government as providing financial and material support to Al-Qaeda and other 
terrorist groups. Critics of Saudi policies have cited reports that the Saudi government 
permitted or encouraged fund raising in Saudi Arabia by some charitable religious 
groups and foundations that espoused extremist ideologies or were linked to or 
exploited by Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups. Al-Qaeda is a foreign terrorist 
organization established by Osama bin Laden in 1988 that launched attacks against 
Americans in Saudi Arabia in 2003 and 2004. On September 11, 2001, nineteen Al-
Qaeda members hijacked and crashed four U.S. commercial jets on American soil, 
leaving nearly 3,000 individuals dead or missing. 
  
 
8 
 
 The Saudi government continues to confront terrorism and extremist ideologies, 
although with varying degrees of success. In the first six months of 2008, the Saudi 
government arrested over 700 militants who had allegedly been planning to attack oil 
fields and other vital installations.  It also planned terrorism trials for almost 1,000 
individuals indicted on various terrorism-related charges including terrorist finance. 
 
Saudi Arabia maintains contact with the two main Palestinian political entities – 
the secular nationalist Fatah movement and the Islamic Resistance Movement, more 
commonly known as Hamas, which remains a U.S.-designated foreign terrorist 
organization. The Saudi government has at times pursued policies relating to the 
Palestinians that are divergent from the expressed preferences of the United States. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
9 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 7. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The Government raised concerns over possible foreign influence because of 
Applicant's familial ties of affection to his two brothers and one sister who reside in 
Saudi Arabia and his mother and two sisters who reside in Egypt. Applicant calls each 
of them three times per year on holidays. Applicant has also provided financial support 
to one sister in Egypt. Not only does disqualifying condition AG ¶ 7(a) require the 
presence of foreign contacts, it also requires that a heightened risk be present. 
Government Counsel introduced sufficient evidence on terrorist activities and human 
rights abuses in both Egypt and Saudi Arabia to establish a heightened risk relating to 
Applicant’s immediate family members in each of these countries. These contacts raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 7(a).  
 
 
10 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 and find that the following mitigate the concern 
under AG ¶ 7(a): 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s brothers and one sister reside in Saudi Arabia and his mother and 
two sisters are in Egypt. Despite these facts, it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of his family or a foreign government 
and the interests of the U.S. because his contacts with both Egypt and Saudi Arabia are 
non-political and limited to good wishes on holidays. He can be expected to resolve any 
potential future conflicts of interest in favor of the U.S. He experienced life in both Egypt 
and Saudi Arabia. He found both to be oppressive. He willingly left his extended family 
and chose to immigrate to the United States to escape the lack of freedom, and give his 
children the opportunity of freedom without oppression. His testimony shows that he is a 
loyal U.S. citizen and would resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S.  
 
 The Appeal Board has long recognized that: 
 
Where the applicant has established by credible, independent evidence 
that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurred in 
the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant 
had made a significant contribution to the national security. The presence 
of such circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that 
he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report a foreign power’s 
attempts at coercion or exploitation.4 
 
 He has served as a civilian employee in Iraq on behalf of the U.S. mission there. 
The letters and pictures from Applicant’s time in Iraq establish that he has served the 
U.S. interest in the past and will continue to do so in the future. He is raising his children 
to be Americans and celebrates all U.S. holidays. He would report any threats made on 
his foreign family members to the proper U.S. authorities. Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 
8(a) and 8(b) apply. 
 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. November 14, 2006.) 
 
11 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant filed bankruptcy in 2001 after the failure of his candy business. He also 
incurred $14,207 in debt on two vehicle repossessions. The Government established a 
case for disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 Three Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant meets significant mitigating factors for financial considerations. While 
his financial difficulties are recent, the circumstances under which they occurred are 
unlikely to recur. The death of his ex-wife caused the delinquency in the case of one of 
the vehicles. They did not predict their divorce, or her death, when they purchased the 
vehicle together. The other repossessed vehicle was for Applicant’s son, and Applicant 
acted responsibly in fulfilling this obligation when his son defaulted on this loan. 
Applicant has documented his successful resolution of both of these debts. Similarly, his 
 
12 
 
2001 bankruptcy was due to a business downturn. Applicant’s financial problems are 
directly attributable to unforeseen circumstances in each instance. He continues to 
remain current on his other financial obligations. It does not appear that Applicant was 
living beyond his means in any regard. He can be trusted to monitor his finances closely 
and resolve his debts in the future. Clearly, Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is well respected by his Deputy Director and Operations Officer, as well as 
past employers. He performs well at his job. His integrity and his financial track record, 
show Applicant is trustworthy. He has served the U.S. as a civilian in Iraq for over two 
years. His dedication and service, along with his love of the freedoms he has been 
granted with U.S. citizenship, indicate he has a strong loyalty to the U.S.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence and Financial Considerations 
security concerns.  
 
 
13 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
