 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-04430 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 8, 2010. 
On March 28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 4, 2011; answered it on April 18, 2011; and 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
April 20, 2011. Department Counsel requested a hearing and was ready to proceed on 
May 28, 2011. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on June 15, 2011, scheduling the hearing for July 19, 2011. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
U, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until August 5, 2011, to 
enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He did not submit any 
additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 27, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 2.b. He denied SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old computer program developer employed by a federal 
contractor since August 2009. His supervisor describes him as an “excellent developer,” 
who “continues to build his technical skills and is an integral part of [two] project teams.”  
 
 Applicant graduated from college in May 1994 with a bachelor’s degree. He 
attended post-graduate classes from September 1995 to December 1996 but did not 
obtain a post-graduate degree. He worked for several private-sector employers until 
April 2009, when he was laid off because of a business downturn. He was unemployed 
in May and June 2009, worked during July 2009, and was unemployed for a short time 
in August 2009 until he began his current job. (GX 1 at 13-20.) He has never held a 
security clearance. 
 
 Applicant married in August 1988. He and his spouse have three daughters, 
ages ten, seven, and three. His spouse is not employed outside the home. 
 
Applicant’s federal income tax returns reflect that his gross income was about 
$95,767 in tax year 2007, and then decreased to about $67,439 for tax year 2010 in his 
current job. (AX C, F.) He is now earning about $76,000 per year. (Tr. 50.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “No” to question 26h, asking if 
during the last seven years, he had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, 
or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. The SOR alleges that he answered “Yes” to 
this question but failed to disclose the $15,422 debt to a home-improvement store 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a; however, the copy of his SCA admitted as GX 1 reflects that he 
answered “No” to question 26h but “Yes” to the preceding question, asking if he had 
bills or debts turned over to a collection agency. (GX 1 at 43.) 
 
 Applicant answered “Yes” to question 26n on his SCA, asking if he was currently 
more than 90 days delinquent on any debts. He disclosed three delinquent debts: a 
delinquent student loan for $1,311; a delinquent medical bill for $524 (alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b); and a delinquent tax bill for $74. He did not disclose a charged-off debt of $15,422, 
 
3 
 
 
owed to a home-improvement store (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a). (GX 1 at 44-47.) The home-
improvement debt was reflected in his credit report dated January 28, 2010 (GX 5 at 7.) 
In his answer, he admitted omitting the debt from his SCA. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was incurred during a major remodeling of a 
bathroom in Applicant’s residence. In March 2010, he told a security investigator that he 
fell behind on paying the debt because he was laid off from work. He described the 
project in detail, and he told the investigator his spouse contacted the creditor, but the 
creditor wanted the entire balance paid in full. (GX 2 at 4.)  
 
 The home-improvement debt became delinquent in July 2009 and was charged 
off in December 2009. (GX 2 at 35.) Applicant testified that he believed his spouse had 
contacted the creditor and that the creditor had sent them a letter offering several lump-
sum payoff options. He did not bring the letter to the hearing. There is no evidence that 
Applicant accepted any of the payoff options, and no payments to the creditor had been 
made as of the date of the hearing. (Tr. 51.) I kept the record open to enable Applicant 
to submit additional evidence of movement toward settling the home improvement debt. 
(Tr. 87.) He did not submit any additional evidence. 
 
In his December 2010 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant explained his 
failure to disclose all his delinquent debts on SCA as follows: “I didn’t have other 
accounts in mind at the time I completed the eQIP. I don’t recall being aware that other 
accounts were delinquent. My intent was to answer completely, based on what I 
understood to be the case, at that time.” (GX 2 at 16.) On the personal financial 
statement submitted in response to the same DOHA interrogatories, he listed the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (GX 2 at 29.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that being laid off in 2009 was a “horrible 
experience.” Although his spouse handled the family finances, he was generally aware 
that they were in financial trouble. (Tr. 53.) Regarding his failure to disclose the home-
improvement debt, he testified: “I honestly don’t think I was even thinking about that 
debt or had it in mind. I wish I had an answer, because losing a job is embarrassing.” 
(Tr. 56.) When asked how he could forget about a large debt for a major home-
improvement project, he responded, “I don’t know how I failed in that regard.” (Tr. 74.) 
 
 The delinquent medical bill and tax bill have been resolved. (GX 2 at 54; AX P-
R.) The student loan is in forbearance until January 2012. (AX K.) Applicant is making 
payments on another delinquent credit card account not alleged in the SOR. (GX 2 at 
69; AX G-J.) His home mortgage payments and two car payments are current. (GX 3 at 
1; AX A, B.) Applicant’s spouse had a delinquent credit card account that was charged 
off in the amount of $15,048. Applicant was an authorized user on the account. He does 
not believe that his spouse is making any payments on the account. (GX 2 at 5; GX 4 at 
1; Tr. 64, 78.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s two older daughters have been attending a private school, at a cost of 
more than $10,000 per year. (GX 2 at 28.) To save money, they withdrew their 
daughters from the school in June 2011. (AX L.)  
 
Applicant and his spouse received an income tax refund of $6,689 for tax year 
2010. (AX F, N.) In July 2011, Applicant withdrew about $1,762 from his 401(k) 
retirement account. (AX S, T.) They used these funds to pay delinquent debts, including 
the medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement submitted in response to DOHA 
interrogatories in December 2010 reflected a net monthly shortfall of about $200. It 
reflected the home-improvement debt, his spouse’s delinquent credit card account, and 
the private school tuition. It did not reflect any payments on the home improvement debt 
and delinquent credit card account. (GX 2 at 28-29.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a $15,422 debt to a home-improvement store (¶ 1.a) and a 
delinquent medical bill for $524 (¶ 1.b). The concern under this guideline is set out in 
AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant admitted both debts alleged in the SOR, and his admissions are 
corroborated by the evidence. At the hearing, he produced evidence that the medical 
debt was paid. His admissions and the evidence of record establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The record includes evidence of several delinquent debts that were not alleged in 
the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s 
credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate 
 
6 
 
 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an 
applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person 
analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the 
debts not alleged in the SOR for these limited purposes. 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are ongoing. Although only two delinquent debts were alleged in the 
SOR, the evidence reflects that other debts became delinquent after he was laid off and 
suffered a substantial income reduction. The debts were not the result of circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur. Business downturns, layoffs and underemployment are 
facts of life in the current economy; I cannot conclude that another layoff or income 
reduction is unlikely for Applicant. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s loss of employment 
and his substantial income reduction upon reemployment were conditions beyond his 
control. However, he did not adjust his lifestyle to his reduced income. He kept his 
children in an expensive private school for two years after his income was significantly 
reduced and he was in financial distress. He did not contact the home-improvement 
store until the debt was charged off and referred for collection. He did not involve 
himself in resolving his financial situation, but left his spouse solely responsible for 
resolving it. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence that Applicant 
sought or received financial counseling. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
“A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s personal debts. Rather, a security clearance adjudication is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in order to 
 
7 
 
 
make a decision about an applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
(App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) 
 
 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement 
that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 Applicant has been minimally involved in the resolution of his debts, entrusting 
that responsibility to his spouse. He had little grasp of his overall financial situation at 
the hearing. He did not produce evidence of any settlement efforts of the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.a, even after he was given additional time to do so. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not disputed any of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his response to question 26h of his SCA, 
by answering “Yes” to question 26h (“Have you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?”) and question 26n 
(Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”), but deliberately failing to 
disclose the home-improvement debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. His answer to question 26h 
is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a and his answer to question 26n is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b.  
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant denied answering “Yes” to question 26h, and the copy of his SCA 
submitted by Department Counsel shows that he answered “No” to the question. The 
record reflects, however, that the home-improvement debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
charged off, and the correct answer to question 26h was “Yes.” The home-improvement 
debt should have been disclosed in response to questions 26h and 26n. Nevertheless, 
the drafting error in SOR ¶ 2.a raises a question whether Applicant had fair notice of the 
specific allegation regarding his answer to question 26h. I will moot that issue by 
resolving SOR ¶ 2.a for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 2.a. in his answer to the SOR, but his explanation 
reflects that he admitted only the omission, not an intentional falsification. When a 
falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden 
of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative 
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 
2004). An applicant’s level of education and business experience are relevant to 
determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant is well-educated and obviously intelligent. The record reflects that his 
loss of employment and subsequent financial problems were very embarrassing. He 
has no experience with the security clearance process and may not have appreciated 
the security significance of an intentional omission of a material fact. At the hearing, he 
was unable to offer a plausible explanation for failing to disclose a large, relatively 
recent debt for a major home improvement. I conclude that he was embarrassed by his 
debts and sought to minimize them by disclosing only the debts that he could resolve 
quickly. His intentional failure to disclose the home-improvement debt is sufficient to 
establish the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on an SCA may be 
mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 
17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant made no effort to 
correct the omission until he was confronted with the evidence by a security investigator 
three months later. 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant 
offense was not minor, because it undermined the integrity of the security clearance 
process. It was recent and did not occur under unique circumstances. It happened only 
once, but it raises serious doubt about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He is embarrassed by the downturn in 
his career and his financial problems. He and his spouse have taken some significant 
steps to conform their lifestyle to their reduced income, but they waited two years to do 
so. Their concern about the quality of their daughters’ education is understandable, but 
their actions were not financially responsible. There has been virtually no movement 
toward settlement of the home-improvement debt. Applicant seemed genuinely 
remorseful for intentionally omitting material information from his SCA, but I am not 
satisfied that he understands the security significance of his conduct.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
