KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s finding that Applicant deliberately omitted information from his security
clearance application was sustainable.  The Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions was
reasonable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 10-00036.a1
DATE: 08/18/2011
DATE: August 18, 2011
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-00036
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 18, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 31, 2011, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant accrued $85,000 of
delinquent debt that remains outstanding.  He has neither organized payment plans, nor retained a
credit counselor to help him resolve these debts.  Applicant failed to list any of his derogatory
financial information, as required on two pertinent sections of his security clearance application that
he completed in April 2009.  Applicant was aware of his delinquencies when he completed the
application, but chose to omit them because “they were so numerous.”
The Judge reached the following conclusions: So long as Applicant’s debt delinquencies are
outstanding and unaddressed, he remains a security risk under Guideline F.   Applicant’s explanation
that he was aware of his debt delinquencies, but chose not to include them on his security clearance
application because they were too numerous is not credible.  Applicant omitted the derogatory
information with the intention of concealing it.  His actions were unmitigated.
Applicant asserts that he did not consciously or deliberately fail to disclose any information
requested of him by the Government.  He maintains that his security clearance application was
simply submitted incomplete, and the lack of completeness stemmed from his inability to obtain a
detailed credit report.  He claims he did not have enough time or energy to gather all the information
required.  Applicant requests that the word “deliberate,” when used by the Judge, be removed from
any and all documents concerning his security clearance application.  He also states that he is
working hard to resolve his debts and that deciding to pay his bills rather than filing for bankruptcy
demonstrates integrity.  Applicant’s assertions do not establish error on the part of the Judge.  
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with
the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at
3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  Applicant’s arguments concerning efforts to retire debt, and his state
of mind at the time he completed his security clearance application are nothing more than an
alternate view of the record evidence.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He discussed the applicability of the mitigating factors listed under
Guidelines F and E and indicated in some detail why the mitigating conditions did not apply.  These
conclusions were reasonable given the Judge’s findings about the nature of Applicant’s
indebtedness, the circumstances under which it arose, and Applicant’s failure to produce reliable
evidence establishing that he is taking meaningful steps toward addressing his financial problems.
Also, the Judge’s conclusions regarding Applicant’s failure to report his financial troubles on his
security clearance application are reasonably supported by the record evidence.
Regarding Applicant’s request to have the word “deliberate” excised from the record and
case file, he is asking for relief that the Board is not authorized to grant, irrespective of the merits
of his request.   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
