                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-03443
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
August 2, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on December 15, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On September 10, 2010, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on September 24, 2010, and he requested
an administrative hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was
assigned to the undersigned on February 4, 2011.  A notice of hearing was issued on
February 11, 2011, and the hearing was scheduled for March 2, 2011.  On February 25,
2011, the matter was rescheduled, and the hearing was set for April 6, 2011.  At the
hearing the Government presented eight exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
through 8 that were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented six exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A and F that were admitted without objection.  He
2
also testified on his own behalf.  The Applicant requested that the record remain open to
submit additional documentation.  The record remained open until close of business on
April 27, 2011.  The Applicant submitted five Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A through E that were admitted without objection.
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on April 19, 2011.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 47 years old and unmarried.  He is a high school graduate with
two years of college.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Federal Protective
Officer and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admits allegations 1(a), 1(c), 1(e), 1(f), 1(h), 1(i), and 1(k) of the
SOR.  He denies allegations 1(b), 1(d), 1(g) and 1(j).  Credit Reports of the Applicant
dated December 19, 2009; July 30, 2010; October 27, 2010; and March 23, 2011,
reflect that the Applicant is indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the SOR in the
amount that totals in excess of $70,000.00.  (Government Exhibits 2, 5, 6 and 8.)
The Applicant has 22 years of service in various positions that include a Logistic
Coordinator for a defense contractor, a Police Officer, a Federal Protection Officer, and
a Reserve Police Officer for various agencies.
Prior to 2007, the Applicant lived with his significant other and shared the living
expenses.  They earned approximately $90,000 jointly, had $10,000 in savings, paid
their bills on time, and had good credit.  Most of the credit was in the Applicant’s name.
Their agreement was that the Applicant pay the mortgage while she paid the utilities
and credit cards.  He and his significant other purchased a house in 2002, and in 2006
they were having another home built.  Sometime in 2007, his significant other stopped
paying her share of the bills in order to save up money so she could leave the
relationship.  They separated in 2007.  The drastic reduction in income caused the
Applicant to lose his house and fall behind on his bills.  
3
In July 2007, the Applicant took on a second job at a hospital.  On the job, he
contracted a deadly infection, known as MRSA, that centralized in his knee.  He was
hospitalized for emergency knee surgery for eleven days without medical insurance.
While undergoing therapy, he was unable to work for two months and had no income.
From July 2007 to June 2008, the Applicant was on disability.  By the end of 2008, he
returned to work.  Since then, he has been trying to play catch up on his bills.  
In September 2010, while at work, the Applicant was required to perform a
physical agility test and re-injured his knee.  He failed the agility test and was
subsequently terminated from his employment.  He obtained a workers compensation
lawyer, filed a lawsuit, and was reinstated on the job.  In September 2010, the Applicant
left work and went back on disability due to his knee injury. The workers compensation
doctor suggested that he undergo a knee replacement.  The Applicant is currently
waiting to find out when or if he is able to return to work.
The Applicant has been unable to pay his delinquent debts.  He has contacted
each of his creditors by letter to inform them of his financial situation.  The following
delinquent debts remain outstanding; A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the
amount of $2,720.00 remains owing.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR).  He is currently
disputing the debt.  The Applicant believed that he had paid a delinquent debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $585.00.  (Tr. p. 62.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in
the amount of $7,066.00 remains owing.  (Tr. p. 63.)  A delinquent debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $618.00 was reduced to $400.00 and remains owing.  (Tr. p.
64.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $10,486.00 remains owing.
(Tr. p. 66.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $6,246.00 remains
owing.  (Tr. p. 67 and Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  The Applicant is unaware of the delinquent
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of  $9,342.00.  He plans to try to research it more.
(Tr. p. 68.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of  $1,138.00 remains
owing.  (Tr. p. 68.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $4,882.00
remains owing.  (Tr. p. 69.)  The Applicant plans to start making payments of $25.00
monthly.  The Applicant claims that he does not owe the delinquent debt in the amount
of $4,123.00.  (Tr. p. 70.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of
$24,363.00 remains unpaid and owing.  (Tr. pp. 70-71).  The debt was for a vehicle that
was surrendered because the payments were $800.00 a month, and the Applicant was
on disability and could not afford to pay them. 
The Applicant is currently on disability and brings home $1,400.00 bi-weekly.  His
present income only allows him to be able to make payments on his expenses that are
necessary to survive such as his medical insurance, rent, utilities and his car payment.
(Tr. p. 72.)  Realizing that his debts are excessive and out of his control, he recently
hired an attorney to file Chapter 7 Bankruptcy on his behalf.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit D.)    
The Applicant has received numerous awards, commendations and certificates
of achievement for his work performance and accomplishments.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit E.) 
4
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
5
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
6
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that circumstances largely beyond the Applicant’s control,
namely, his separation from his significant other, his unexpected knee infection and its
complications, his knee injury at work, his loss of work, and his year on disability, all
contributed to his financial difficulties.  These things were completely unforeseeable.
Given his circumstances, the Applicant has not had sufficient income to pay his
delinquent debts.  For some time now, the Applicant has known that his delinquent
debts were out of control and at issue.  Although he contacted the creditors and
informed them of his circumstances, he did nothing more. Recently, the Applicant has
hired an attorney and plans to file for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 7.  However,
at the present time, his debts remain excessive, owing and delinquent.          
 Once the Applicant has filed bankruptcy and discharged his debts, he will be in a
better position to be eligible for access to classified information.  At this time, however,
the Applicant has not done enough to demonstrate that he can properly handle his
financial affairs or that he is fiscally responsible.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation apply.  Although Mitigating Condition 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances applies, is partially
applicable, but is not controlling in this case.  The Applicant has simply not done enough
to demonstrate that he is or can be financially responsible.  Accordingly, I find against
the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, and a unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, including the Applicant’s awards
and commendations for his work performance.  However, they do not mitigate the
negative effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant
has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
7
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
               Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara   1.d.:         Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
               Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara   1.h.:         Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.j.: Against the Applicant.
               Subpara.  1.k.: Against the Applicant.
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
