1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 10-06257 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaires for Public Trust Position (SF 85P) on 
December 6, 2009. On December 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a determination of trustworthiness, suitability, and eligibility 
for the Applicant to hold a Sensitive Systems Position (ADP-I/II/III).  The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD 
C3I) entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness 
2 
 
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions as 
defined in DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated 
January of 1987. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 16, 2010. He 
answered the SOR in writing on January 6, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on January 10, 2011. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 26, 2011, and I received the case 
assignment on February 2, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 2, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 23, 2011. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were received without objection.  Applicant 
testified and did not submit any exhibits. He requested until March 16, 2011, to submit 
two documents and I granted his request. Applicant never sent any documents. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 6, 2011. Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations. He did 
not provide any additional information to support his request for eligibility for a public 
trust position beyond his denials.  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He is unmarried. Applicant works for a defense 
contractor in the health care business. He earns $32,000 annually. His monthly 
expenses are $1,380 and his income is $1,400. (Tr. 11-13, 19; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts dating from 2006. There are 12 delinquent debts 
listed in the SOR totaling $27,801.06. None of them have been repaid or are being 
resolved through installment payment agreements. Applicant stated he obtained credit 
cards about four years ago and made many purchases that he could not pay for later. 
Applicant claimed he rehabilitated his student loans two years ago, but they fell into 
default again. He also claimed he was paying $120 monthly on his student loans after a 
down payment of $300, but he never submitted any documentary proof of any 
payments. Applicant also admitted he had not filed state and federal income tax returns 
for the past five years because he knew the federal government would take any refunds 
to pay down his student loan balance. (Tr. 13-35; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for 45 days in 2007 and for six months from July 2008 
to January 2009. Applicant did not submit any documents or other evidence to show his 
periods of unemployment adversely affected his ability to repay his debts. (Tr. 16-18; 
Exhibit 2)   
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
3 
 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
4 
 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG &19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG &19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debts and 
was unable to pay any of them during the last five years. AG ¶19(e) states “consistent 
spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis” 
may raise security concerns. Applicant has a high debt-to-income ratio and long-
standing delinquent debt. Finally, AG ¶19(g) provides that a condition against clearance 
is, “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the 
fraudulent filing of same.” This disqualifying condition applies because Applicant 
admitted he failed to file his income tax returns for the past five years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose about 2006. He accumulated delinquent 
debt due to his spending habits.   
 
Under AG &20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant spent money 
he had no possibility of repaying. The debts have remained unpaid for five years. This 
mitigating condition does not apply. 
5 
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG &20(c). Similarly, AG &20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@  
 
Applicant has had no financial counseling. He has not started a repayment 
program for any debt, so there is no good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Applicant has 
no legal basis to dispute his debts. There is no affluence shown by the evidence. 
Therefore, AG ¶19 (c) to (f) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant was 34 years old when he 
started accumulating debts he could not repay. He made a conscious decision not to file 
his income tax returns for the past five years because any refund would be taken to pay 
his student loans, thereby avoiding the repayment of that debt. His conduct of not 
repaying his debts is current, ongoing, and frequent. There is no rehabilitation shown. 
Applicant will continue his past conduct of ignoring his debts and not filing his tax 
returns. Because of the magnitude of the debts and Applicant’s decision not to repay 
them or file his tax returns, there is potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
