                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08261 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Influence). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 9, 2010. On April 
8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline B and Guideline C. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR and timely requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on May 20, 2011. The case was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
assigned to me on May 31, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 7, 2011, 
scheduling the hearing for July 14, 2011.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of 
two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through Q, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2011. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about India. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as HX I. 
Applicant did not object to documents. (Tr. 14) I took administrative notice as requested 
by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my 
findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and offered explanations. He denied the factual 
allegation under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). His admissions in his answer and at 
the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a native of India. In 1991, he received his bachelor’s degree in 
computer engineering in India. He did not serve in the military in India. He came to the 
United States in 1996 as a consultant on a work visa. He has almost 20 years 
experience in the field of information technology, and has been with his current 
employer since 2009. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2007, (AX D) and he 
surrendered his Indian passport in April 2011. (AX B) In April 2011, he also officially 
renounced his Indian citizenship. (AX C) He has a U.S. passport. (AX A)1 Applicant has 
not returned to India since he became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 35) 
 
Applicant’s wife also is a native of India. They were married in March 1998, and 
they have two children. (AX D) His wife came to the United States in June 1998 after 
their marriage. (Tr. 59) She has a green card that expires in 2013. (AX Q) However, on 
July 12, 2011, she submitted her application for U.S. citizenship. The INS has 
acknowledged receipt of her application. (Tr. 47) She did not apply sooner because she 
was not seeking to obtain federal employment, and believed she could wait until her 
green card expired in 2013. However, her intent has been to become a U.S. citizen.  
 
 Applicant’s two sons are U.S. citizens. They have U.S. passports. They were 
never dual citizens. (Tr. 40) Under Indian law, dual citizenship is not recognized. (AX F) 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His father, who is 69 years 
old, is a retired textile worker. His mother, who is 58 years old, is a homemaker. They 
are not aware of Applicant’s work or his application for a security clearance. (Tr. 49) 
1 The Government withdrew the allegations of security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) 
at the hearing. 
 
3 
 
 
They do not speak English. They have no affiliation with the government. Applicant 
speaks to them on the phone about once a week. Applicant sends his parents money to 
help them with living costs. Due to the high rate of inflation in India, Applicant places the 
money (approximately $500 every two months) for his parents in an Indian bank 
account.  
 
Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen and resident of India. She is 82 years old. 
She has health problems, and Applicant speaks to her on the phone occasionally.  
Applicant’s uncle is a citizen and resident of India. Applicant rarely speaks to him and 
has not seen him since 2006. (Tr. 51) Applicant has not talked to him in over a year. He 
is not aware that Applicant is seeking a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of India. Her husband works as 
supervisor in the Department of Education for a state agency. (Tr. 50) He does not 
report to the federal government. Applicant speaks to his brother-in-law occasionally. 
He saw him in June 2006, when he visited India. (Tr. 50) Neither his sister nor brother-
in-law knows that Applicant is seeking a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of India. 
His father-in-law is a retired farmer. His mother-in-law is not employed outside the 
home. Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law do not depend on Applicant and his 
wife for financial support. (Tr. 64) Applicant’s wife has telephonic contact with her 
mother about once a week. (Tr. 65) Applicant’s wife visits her parents for four to six 
weeks. Her last visit to India was in 2009, but Applicant did not accompany her. (Tr. 61) 
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of India. Applicant’s wife visits 
her brother once a year and communicates with him by telephone once or twice a 
month. 
 
  Applicant and his wife own a home in the United States. The value of the home 
is approximately $300,000. He and his wife have savings and retirement accounts worth 
about $200,000 or more. Their real estate in the United States is jointly owned. (AX P)   
 
 In 2007, Applicant purchased a home in India so that his parents could move 
there. He does not intend to live there. In April 2011, he deeded the property, valued at 
$120,000 to his father. (AX K) Applicant believes he has a duty to his elder parents who 
have sacrificed for him so that he could come to the United States and receive a good 
education.  He plans to live the rest of his life in the United States, raise and educate his 
children in the United States, and see his children marry and raise their families in the 
United States.  
 
 Applicant disclosed the names of three childhood friends who live in India on his 
security clearance application. He has very limited communication with them. They do 
not know the nature of Applicant’s work or about his application for a security clearance. 
(GE 1) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s team manager recommends him for a security clearance. He testified 
at the hearing that Applicant is dependable and does an excellent job. (Tr. 17)  
Applicant possesses excellent skills, work ethic, and experience. Applicant is a valued 
member of the team. In sum, Applicant is described as honest, forthright, reliable, and 
of the highest character. (Tr. 20) 
 
 The Director of the defense contract group for whom Applicant works, has known 
Applicant since 2009. She described Applicant as having unique technology skills and 
expertise. (Tr. 25) He has had access to confidential data and has not had any incidents 
with failing to protect such data. His clients describe him as a hard worker who follows 
through on given tasks. (Tr. 26) Applicant is conscious of deadlines and is well regarded 
by his peers. He has been involved in some challenging projects and received positive 
feedback.  
 
 India is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Its political history since it 
gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included several armed conflicts 
with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic outbreaks of religious 
riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist groups in different parts of 
the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit.  
 
 India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India has always been an active member of the United Nations. 
Starting this year, it is a non-permanent member of the Security Council, and it seeks a 
permanent seat on the Security Council. 
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons 
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important 
to U.S. strategic interests. The strategic partnership between the United States and 
India is based on shared values such as democracy, pluralism, and the rule of law. 
Since 2002, the United States and India have held a series of substantive combined 
exercises involving all military services.  
The United States is India’s largest foreign investment partner. Since December 
2006, direct civilian nuclear commerce with India has been permitted. The two countries 
have a common interest in the free flow of commerce and resources, including through 
the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean. 
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically stable Asia. They are seeking to foster bilateral relations by 
establishing working groups to address (1) strategic cooperation; (2) energy and climate 
change; (3) education and development; (4) economics, trade, and agriculture; and (5) 
science and technology, health, and innovation.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 In the past, India had long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet 
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts. 
India is one of many countries engaged in economic intelligence collection and 
industrial espionage directed at the United States. The United States has longstanding 
economic issues with India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade 
in dual-use technology. There have been numerous incidents of international 
businesses illegally exporting, or attempting to export restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States to India. 
 
 The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are 
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the 
police force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. Abuses by police 
and security forces have occurred primarily in criminal investigations and efforts to 
suppress separatist and terrorist groups. There is no evidence that India uses torture or 
abuse against its citizens to extract economic intelligence.  
 
 India does not recognize dual citizenship. Foreign citizens entering India are 
required to obtain a visa. Travelers entering on tourist visas are not allowed reentry 
within two months, unless they obtain specific permission. Non-citizens of Indian origin 
may obtain a “person of Indian origin” (PIO) card, which allows unlimited travel to and 
from India.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
 
6 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of India, residing in the United 
States (¶ 2.a), Applicant’s two children are dual citizens of the United States and India 
(¶ 2.b), his parents are citizens and residents of India (¶ 2.c), Applicant’s sister and 
brother-in-law are citizens and residents of India (¶ 2.d), Applicant’s brother-in-law is 
employed as a clerk for a state government agency in India (¶ 2.e). It also alleges 
Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen and resident of India (¶ 2.f), his uncle is a citizen 
and resident of India (¶ 2.g), Applicant has friends who are citizens and residents of 
India (¶ 2.h), Applicant owns a vacation home in India, valued at approximately 
$120,000 USD (¶ 2.i) and he maintains a checking account in India and deposits 
approximately $500 every two months to help support his parents and pay for his home 
in India. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Four disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Third, a security 
concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(d). Fourth a security 
concern also may be raised by “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in 
a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
 
8 
 
 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant has lived and worked in the United States since 1996. He is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s wife and two sons reside in the United States. His 
sons are U.S. citizens and his wife is in the process of obtaining her U.S. citizenship. 
His sons are not dual citizens with India. His parents, grandmother, uncle, and siblings 
are residents and citizens of India. 
 
Applicant’s wife’s mother, father, and siblings are citizens and residents of India. 
A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation 
to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not rebutted this 
presumption.  
 
After considering the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India as well as each 
individual tie, I conclude that Applicant’s family ties are sufficient to raise a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant 
speaks to his parents on the phone periodically. His wife spent four to six weeks visiting 
her parents and siblings in India last year. Based on all these circumstances, I conclude 
that AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) are raised. 
 
 Applicant’s financial interests in India are not substantial. The concern in his case 
is based primarily on the home he owns in India. He has deeded the home to his father 
so that his parents may live in the home. The money that Applicant has in an Indian 
bank account is minimal. The money helps his parents with their daily expenses.  I 
conclude that AG ¶ 7(e) is not an issue. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). India engages in economic and industrial espionage, and it has 
been involved in incidents involving illegal importation of restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States. Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His 
family members spend time visiting in India. His wife’s parents and siblings are citizens 
and residents of India. For these reasons, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) is not established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing “there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant’s financial interests in India are minimal compared with his assets in the 
United States. Although he has a bank account in India, Applicant does not own any 
property in India. He and his wife have personal assets in the United States worth more 
than $500,000. Applicant and his wife surrendered their Indian passports and use their 
U.S. passports to travel to and from India. They have not taken advantage of the 
convenience of an Indian PIO card. I conclude that Applicant would resolve any conflict 
between the interests of the United States and the protection of his Indian assets in 
favor of the United States. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c). 
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
Applicant has parents, a grandparent, an uncle and siblings permanently residing in 
India. He notes three Indian friends with whom he sometimes communicates. He has 
not visited India since 2006. His wife visits her family and stays with them for more than 
four or five weeks. Applicant receives some credit under this mitigating condition, but it 
is not fully established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 
1996. He and his wife reside in the United States with their two sons who are U.S. 
citizens. His wife is in the process of obtaining her U.S. citizenship. He was articulate, 
candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He and his wife still have cultural, family, 
 
10 
 
 
and emotional attachments to India, but they see the United States as the future home 
for their family. Applicant has been successful in the defense contracting business for 
many years. His current employer recommends him for his professionalism and 
integrity.  
 
 Applicant chose to leave his home and emigrate from India in search of an 
education and career opportunities. He wants to provide for his family in the United 
States. He has worked hard in the information technology field and has received praise 
for his work ethic and accomplishments. Applicant purchased a home and has 
maintained excellent credit. He has a net worth of more than $500,000. His family 
intends to remain in the United States.  
 
 India is a partner of the United States in the global war on terrorism. While 
terrorism and some domestic unrest exist within some areas of India, none of it appears 
to threaten the enclave in which Applicant’s family and property are located. There is no 
evidence any of the individuals at issue are involved with, or under scrutiny, by interests 
antithetical to the United States. Applicant has not returned to India since 2006. 
 
 Regarding Applicant’s life in the United States, he is a contented American 
citizen, with a stable family, social, and professional life. His life is focused here. He is 
admired by his peers. He and his wife intend to continue their lives in the United States. 
There is no evidence indicating that he may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
power or interest. In light of these facts and the country at issue, I find that Applicant 
successfully mitigated foreign influence concerns.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):  WITHDRAWN 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
