                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09073 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines C and B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 18, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 20, 2011. DOHA issued 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
a Notice of Hearing on June 1, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 20, 
2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant did not object and they 
were admitted. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of certain 
facts relating to Thailand as contained in Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I took administrative 
notice of the source documents. Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered Exhibit 
(AE) A, which was admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 27, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated in the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He works for a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school and earned an associate’s degree and also attended a technical school. He 
married in 2011 and has no children.1  
 
 Applicant’s mother moved to the United States in 1981 or 1982 from Thailand. 
Applicant immigrated with his father and two brothers to the United States from Thailand 
in 1991. His parents hold permanent resident status in the United States, but remain 
citizens of Thailand. His two older brothers are dual citizens of the United States and 
Thailand. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006. He maintains dual 
citizenship status with the United States and Thailand. Applicant holds a current Thai 
passport and a current U.S. passport. He first obtained a Thai passport in 2005, before 
to being naturalized as a U. S. citizen. He obtained a U. S. passport in 2006. He 
renewed his Thai passport in 2009, and it expires in 2014. He does not intend to 
renounce his Thai citizenship or surrender his Thai passport. He applied for his U.S. 
citizenship because he was concerned that if he only had permanent resident status, he 
would only be permitted to remain outside of the United States for six months. If he 
departed for a longer period then he would have to reapply for permanent resident 
status. He also wanted a U. S. passport so if anything happens while he is traveling in 
Thailand he can use his U.S. passport. Applicant considers himself both a Thai citizen 
and a U.S. citizen. When he enters the United States he uses his U.S. passport. When 
he enters Thailand he uses his Thai passport. If he was drafted by the Thai Government 
to serve in the military, he would. If he was drafted by the U.S. Government to serve in 
the military, he would.2  
 
 After being laid off from his job in the United States, Applicant moved to Thailand 
for employment from March 2006 to June 2008, where he worked for a Thai business. 
He lived with his aunt for a period until he could afford another place of residence. He 
1 Tr. 26, 31. 
 
2 Tr. 22, 37, 39-55, 58-68. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
has another aunt in Thailand. Both of his aunts live in the same building where they 
work. One aunt has a small clothing factory and the other has a sundry store.3  
 
 Applicant has made six trips to Thailand since 2005, including the period he 
resided there. He used his Thai passport each time for convenience. His last trip was 
December 2010.4  
 
 Neither of Applicant’s parents have any affiliation with the Thai government or 
military. They both possess Thai passports. Applicant’s father lived in Thailand from 
2004 to 2009. He had to reapply for a permanent resident status when he returned. 
Applicant has an uncle who is in the Thai army and one of his relatives is retired from 
the Navy. His mother has a niece who lives in Thailand and she maintains regular 
contact with her.5  
 
 Applicant’s two brothers are not married. Both travel to Thailand to see family. 
His oldest brother is a frequent traveler to Thailand. On one visit he stayed for six 
months. He believes his brothers travel on their Thai passports.6  
 
 Applicant and his wife participated in a cultural wedding ceremony in Thailand in 
2009, but were not legally married until she came to the United States in 2011, where 
they completed the formal paperwork. His wife is a citizen of Thailand and came to the 
United States on a fiancée visa. They were married in the United States in January 
2011. She is not employed. She resides with Applicant in the United States. She is 
applying for a permanent resident card. Applicant and his wife, parents, and brothers all 
reside in the same residence in the United States.7 
 
 Applicant hopes to remain in the United States, but if his wife wants to return to 
Thailand he will acquiesce. His wife’s mother, three sisters, and two brothers, are 
citizens and residents of Thailand.8  
 
 Applicant provided a letter of recommendation from a former employer where he 
worked in 2006. The employer commented that Applicant performed in a proficient and 
diligent manner and successfully resolved numerous challenges. He was considered 
professional and effective.9 
3 Tr. 32-37, 74-76. 
 
4 Tr. 38-39. 
 
5 Tr.56-62. 
 
6 Tr. 64-68. 
 
7 Tr. 26-30, 57-64, 68-72. 
 
8 Tr. 68-70. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Thailand10 
 
The Kingdom of Thailand is a constitutional monarchy composed of 
a King, Prime Minister, and bicameral legislature. In 2006, a non-violent 
coup by top military officers overthrew the government, repealed the 
constitution, and abolished both houses of Parliament. In December 2007, 
free and fair multi-party elections restored democratic governance. 
However, since this election, two subsequent Prime Ministers were forced 
to resign because of decisions by Thailand’s court system. After political 
protests from May through December 2008, a revised coalition came to 
power.  
 
In addition to the political turmoil since the 2006 coup, Thailand has 
endured a persistent separatist insurgency in its majority-Muslim southern 
provinces. Sectarian violence between insurgents and security forces in 
Thailand’s majority-Muslim provinces has left over 4,000 people dead 
since 2004. Since 2007, attacks have become more sophisticated and 
coordinated. This insurgency has resulted in numerous human-rights 
abuses, including killings, committed by ethnic Malay Muslims insurgents 
and government security forces. In the spring of 2010, political turmoil and 
protest wracked Thailand resulting in the deaths of over 90 people and 
injuries to over 260 people, including two U.S. citizens. For 2011, stability 
appears to have returned to the government.  
 
The [U.S.] Department of State has criticized the Thai government’s 
overall human rights record. Security forces continued at times to use 
excessive force against criminal suspects, and some elements also 
committed or were connected to extrajudicial, arbitrary, and unlawful 
killings. Reports also linked police to disappearances, torture, beatings, 
and abuse. The government also maintains some limits on freedom of 
speech, press, and assembly.  
 
The State Department is concerned that there is an increased risk 
of terrorism in Southeast Asia, including Thailand. The State Department 
warns all Americans to exercise caution when in Thailand for several 
reasons. Thailand’s southern region has been experiencing almost daily 
incidents of criminally and politically motivated violence, including 
incidents attributed to armed local separatist/extremist groups. While 
extremist groups primarily focus on Thai government interests in south 
Thailand, recent violence has also targeted public places, including tourist 
areas. The Thai/Burma border is the site of on-going conflicts between the 
Burmese Army and armed oppositions groups, as well as clashes 
10 HE I. This exhibit details the official U.S. Government source documents that were used to provide the 
factual summary. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
between Thai security forces and armed drug traffickers. Finally, there are 
border clashes on the Thai/Cambodian border as well.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
11 HE I. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern for foreign preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country. 
 
Applicant renewed his Thai passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He intends to 
maintain his Thai passport and citizenship. He considers himself a dual citizen of 
Thailand and the United States. He may return to live in Thailand if his wife wants to. He 
exercises his rights and privileges as both a U.S. citizen and a Thai citizen. He uses 
both his Thai passport and U.S. passport. If drafted by either country he would serve. I 
find the above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
I have considered all the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 and the following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  
 
7 
 
 
(d) the use of the foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant renewed his Thai passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He uses it 
when he travels to Thailand. He considers himself a dual citizen of both Thailand and 
the United States. He is unwilling to renounce his Thai citizenship. His dual citizenship 
is not based solely on his parents’ citizenship or his birth in Thailand. Rather, he has 
actively maintained his Thai citizenship. He became a citizen of the U.S. so he would 
not have to reapply for permanent residency status if he were to move to Thailand for 
more than six months. He plans on retaining his Thai passport and does not intend to 
destroy or surrender it. None of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern for foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or person, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
  AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” 
The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a 
relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government or owning 
property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country 
as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”12 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”13 Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerability to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States.  
 
Thailand’s political turmoil, violence, and human-rights violations are a cause of 
concern. The continued instability of the government, excessive force used by the 
security forces and the limitations of freedom of speech, press, and assembly raises 
issues. Thailand’s increase in terrorism and occurrences of violence in public places, 
including tourist areas also is a concern, along with their border concerns.  
 
  Applicant worked for a private Thai company in 2006 to 2008. He no longer has 
contact with the company, nor does he have a financial interest in it. I find his past 
employment with this company is not a security concern.  
 
  Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Thailand. His parents are permanent residents of 
the United States, but maintain their Thai citizenship. His father returned and lived in 
Thailand for five years. His brothers are dual citizens of Thailand. They travel frequently 
to Thailand and his older brother stays for extended periods. Applicant moved to 
Thailand for a two-year period. Applicant’s connections to his family members 
potentially create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion, and also create a potential conflict of interest. Therefore, I find 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c) apply.  
 
12 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
 
9 
 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s wife is a Thai citizen and he maintains close ties with his family 
members, some of whom travel and live in Thailand for extended periods of time. His 
brothers maintain dual citizenship and his parents have chosen to remain permanent 
residents of the United States and maintain their Thai citizenship. Applicant’s 
relationships with his family, the issues regarding Thailand, and his allegiance to 
Thailand makes him vulnerable, such that he could be in a position of having to choose 
between his family and the interests of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply. There is clearly a conflict of interest in that Applicant has strong ties to Thailand. 
Although he also considers himself a U.S. citizen, his sense of loyalty or obligation to 
Thailand cannot be described as minimal. He would return to live there and exercise his 
citizenship if his wife wants to return. I am not convinced that Applicant would resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
Applicant’s contact with his wife, parents, and brothers is not casual or infrequent. They 
all live together in the same house. I find AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
10 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2006. He intends to retain his Thai citizenship and exercise it. In the past, he 
returned to Thailand to work and he may move there again in the future. He is recently 
married and his wife is a citizen of Thailand. His parents are also citizens of Thailand, 
and his brothers exercise dual citizenship. He and his family continue to travel to 
Thailand and stay for extended periods. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guideline for Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.e:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
