                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 10-02651 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s debts were discharged in a 1998 bankruptcy proceeding. In 2000, 
she acquired a house and debts beyond her financial means. She sold the house, but 
retained some of her delinquent debt. Through the years, she continued to acquire 
additional delinquent debt. She established some circumstances beyond her control that 
contributed, to some extent, to her inability to pay her debts. Notwithstanding, she failed 
to establish a track record of financial responsibility in addressing her legal obligations. 
Moreover, she falsified her 2007 public trust position application. Eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on 
September 1, 2007. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
 
On January 20, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision. Specifically, trustworthiness concerns were 
raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 18, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 13, 2011, to 
determine whether Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position should be granted or 
denied. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 12, 2011, convening a hearing on 
June 1, 2011. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. 
Applicant testified and presented exhibits (AE) 1 through 13. AE 14 was timely received 
post-hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 8, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 1.h, 1.j, and 
1.l through 1.pp, with explanations. She did not admit or deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.f, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.k, and I entered a denial. She denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. Her 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence 
of record, including Applicant’s answer to the SOR, her interview, her answers to DOHA 
interrogatories, and her demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old systems administrator working for a defense 
contractor. She graduated from high school in 1982. She attended college on and off 
until 2007, and accumulated around 70 credit hours, but she has not completed a 
degree. Applicant worked for another Government contractor from 1996 until 2001, and 
received access to classified information at the secret level. When she left that job, her 
access to classified information was terminated. There is no information to show that 
she has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
Applicant divorced her spouse in June 1991. She has a 28-year-old daughter for 
whom she provides some financial support. Applicant provides $100 a month to her 
mother to assist her mother in taking care of her nine-year-old grandchild.  
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and DoD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation). 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
Applicant worked two jobs, for the most part, from around 2000 until June 2007. 
In March 2007, she underwent surgery and was out of work for approximately five 
weeks. She returned to work and in June 2007, she was laid off by employer A. She 
continued to work for employer B; however, she was working on an on-call basis, and 
worked between 20 and 40 hours a week. She started working in her current position 
(employer C) in October 2007. She has been consistently employed in that position 
since October 2007, albeit working for two different contractors. She maintained two 
jobs (employers B and C) until September 2008, when she was laid off by employer B. 
 
In her September 2007 public trust position application, Applicant was asked to 
disclose whether in the last seven years she had filed for bankruptcy protection, had 
been subject to a tax lien, or had a legal judgment rendered against her for any debts. 
She disclosed that in April 2002, she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. She 
later requested the dismissal of the filing to be able to sell her house. Applicant did not 
disclose any judgments filed against her during the required period. Applicant was also 
asked to disclose whether she was over 180 days delinquent on any loans or financial 
obligations. She did not disclose any loans or financial obligations on which she was 
over 180 days delinquent.  
 
The subsequent background investigation disclosed that in 1998, Applicant was 
discharged of her financial obligations pursuant to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding. 
Moreover, the investigation revealed the 39 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling over $41,000, which included a $394 civil judgment filed against Applicant in 
April 2001.3 She also had 18 financial accounts that were over 180 days delinquent, 
including one civil judgment (SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.k, 1.s, 1.t, 1.v, 1.w, 1.y, 1.z, 1.aa 
through 1.gg, and 1.ii through 1.oo). 
 
Applicant explained that her 1998 Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing was the result of 
her spending beyond her financial means. She attributed her overspending to being 
young and immature. Concerning her current financial problems, she explained that in 
2000, she made the mistake of purchasing a house beyond her financial means. At the 
time, she was working two jobs and she believed they would provide sufficient income 
for her to pay the mortgage, her day-to-day living expenses, and her other financial 
obligations. With the purchase of the home, she incurred additional financial obligations 
related to it such as furniture (SOR ¶ 1.v), services, and utilities. In 2002, she was 
forced to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection because she could not meet her 
financial obligations. In 2003, she requested the dismissal of her 2002 Chapter 13 
bankruptcy filing in order for her to sell the house. She sold the house, but many of the 
related financial obligations remain until today. 
 
In March 2007, Applicant underwent surgery and was out of work for 
approximately five weeks. After returning to work in June 2007, she was laid off from 
one of her jobs. Although she had a second job, that job became a part-time job when 
 
3 The same judgment is alleged twice in SOR ¶¶ 1.u and 1.v. I find for Applicant with respect to 
SOR ¶ 1.u. 
 
4 
 
 
she was limited to working between 20 and 40 hours a week. She also had a second 
operation in 2007 that impacted on her ability to work for two weeks. Applicant attributed 
most of her financial problems to her medical problems, getting laid off, and being 
underemployed. Applicant has been consistently employed since October 2007. 
Notwithstanding, she claimed she did not have the financial means to pay her 
delinquent obligations, day-to-day living expenses, and current financial obligations. 
 
In October 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator 
concerning her current financial situation and the delinquent accounts alleged in the 
SOR. During the interview, Applicant acknowledged that most of the delinquent medical 
accounts were her debts and promised to make arrangements to pay them (SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.d, 1.y, 1.aa, 1.dd through 1.gg, and 1.ii through 1.ll). She also promised to 
investigate the two medical accounts she did not recognize. At her hearing, Applicant 
testified that in February 2011, she disputed SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d because she did not 
recognize these two medical debts and there was insufficient information to identify the 
creditors. Concerning the remaining delinquent medical accounts, Applicant admitted 
that these were her delinquent accounts, but indicated they were “no longer in collection 
according to the credit report received 31 January 2011.” (Answer to the SOR.) At her 
hearing, Applicant confirmed these were her delinquent medical debts, but that they 
“disappeared” from her credit report without her having to dispute them. (Tr. 77) 
 
Similarly, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.v, 
1.w, 1.z, 1.bb, 1.cc, 1.hh, 1.mm, and 1.nn, but testified she had done nothing to resolve 
them because these debts were “no longer in collection according to the credit report 
received 31 January 2011.” Applicant presented little or no evidence of any effort to 
contact her creditors, pay her legal obligations, or otherwise resolve her delinquent 
debts since she acquired them until early 2011. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g alleged the same delinquent debt. I find for Applicant in SOR 
¶ 1.g. Applicant testified that her mother signed for cable service and Applicant’s name 
also was included in the contract. She claimed she disputed the debt because it was her 
mother’s cable debt and she believed her mother paid it. As of her hearing day, 
Applicant had not asked her mother whether she paid the debt. Applicant also claimed 
she disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.x and 1.oo; however, she presented no 
documentary evidence to support her claims. 
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows she paid SOR ¶ 1.h in April 2007. (GE 
5) She contacted the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i in April 2011, requesting information 
to settle the account. She did not receive a response. She contacted the creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j in March 2011, established a payment plan, and she made one 
$93 payment in April 2011. She contacted the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k in March 
2011, to dispute the total of the debt owed and to establish a payment plan. She 
testified she is in the process of resolving her dispute.  
 
Applicant owes close to $11,000 for the seven outstanding student loans alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.l through 1.r, which were placed for collection between September 2007 
 
5 
 
 
and October 2008. In February 2011, Applicant contacted the current collection 
agencies and established payment plans for the seven loans. She presented 
documentary evidence of consecutive payments made from February until May 2011. 
Applicant promised to start making payments sometime in the near future on the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.s, 1.t, and 1.pp. She presented no evidence of contacts or 
settlement negotiations with these creditors.  
 
In addition to the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant owes the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) approximately $12,000 for tax years 2008 and 2009. She is paying $100 a 
month in accordance with her payment arrangement with the IRS. She also filed her 
federal income tax returns late for a couple of years. (Tr. 87-89) Applicant did not 
participate in any financial counseling and she did not present documentary evidence of 
a current working budget. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for her financial problems. She indicated that with 
her current steady income she started to address her delinquent obligations. She 
claimed she has been contacting creditors to make payment arrangements but averred 
she is having difficulty finding the current debt collectors, getting information on her 
debts, and receiving responses to her inquiries. She admitted she made several 
financial mistakes such as buying a home beyond her financial means and cosigning a 
car loan for a girlfriend.  
 
Applicant testified she has learned her lesson, and promised to resolve her 
financial situation sometime in the near future. She noted she paid two debts and is 
making payments on her student loans. She plans to take another job to accelerate her 
debt payments. She also noted that most of her old delinquent accounts have 
disappeared from her recent credit reports and she is no longer responsible for them. 
Applicant has been earning approximately $61,000 a year since October 2007. 
 
Applicant’s supervisors consider her to be an outstanding employee with 
impressive performance. She is resourceful, creative, and a solutions oriented person. 
She welcomes new duties and responsibilities. She is diligent, responsible, and 
dependable, and has proven to be an asset to her employer. Her supervisors strongly 
endorse her eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Concerning the allegation that she falsified her public trust position application 
(she failed to disclose any debts over 180 days delinquent), Applicant explained that 
she made an honest mistake. She testified that she misunderstood the question. She 
believed she was required to disclose only delinquent obligations that were guaranteed 
by the Federal Government. Considering the plain language of the question, Applicant’s 
education, maturity, demeanor while testifying, the number and value of the debts, and 
the periods during which the debts have been delinquent, her claim of honest mistake is 
not credible. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s controlling adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
7 
 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to 
the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection in 1998 and was discharged of her 
financial obligations. She developed further financial problems and again filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 2002. The filing was dismissed in 2003, to allow her 
to sell her house. Thereafter, she accumulated 39 delinquent debts, totaling nearly 
$41,000. Her debts became delinquent because she purchased a house and acquired 
debts beyond her financial means. Later, she was unable to pay the debts, in part 
because of her periods of underemployment. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing. Her periods of unemployment due to her surgeries and her 
underemployment are considered as circumstances beyond her control that contributed 
to a certain extent to her inability to pay her debts. Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to 
establish that she acted responsibly under the totality of her circumstances. She filed for 
bankruptcy protection in 1998, and did not learn from that experience. She acquired a 
house beyond her means in 2000, and accumulated significant delinquent debt, most of 
which remains unresolved. She presented little evidence of contact with creditors, 
settlements, payments, or of efforts to otherwise resolve her delinquent financial 
obligations since she acquired them until January 2011. Such behavior is disconcerting 
 
8 
 
 
considering that Applicant did not disclose her delinquent debts in her public trust 
position application. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Furthermore, she was made aware of the Government’s financial considerations 
concerns during her 2007 interview and through DOHA’s June 2010 interrogatories. 
Notwithstanding, she took little action to resolve even her small debts (under $100). 
Instead, she elected to let the passage of time make her delinquent debts “disappear” 
from her credit report. Applicant should have been more diligent in her efforts to resolve 
her delinquent financial obligations. On balance, and considering the evidence as a 
whole, Applicant’s financial irresponsibility casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant has not received counseling, her financial 
problem is ongoing, and there are no clear indications that her financial problems are 
under control. Applicant receives some credit for her recent efforts to contact creditors 
to settle and pay her delinquent obligations. Notwithstanding, such last minute efforts 
cannot be considered as a good-faith effort to resolve her debts. AG ¶ 20(d) partially 
applies, but does not mitigate the trustworthiness concern. Applicant presented some 
evidence of recent disputes of her past-due debt. However, considering the record as a 
whole, she failed to establish that she had a reasonable basis for her disputes. AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. AG ¶ 20(f) is not raised by the evidence in this case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a trustworthiness concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose in her September 2007 application for a 
public trust position that she had 18 financial accounts that were over 180 days 
delinquent, including one civil judgment (SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.k, 1.s, 1.t, 1.v, 1.w, 1.y, 
1.z, 1.aa through 1.gg, and 1.ii through 1.oo). When confronted by an investigator 
during her August 2007 interview, she admitted her delinquent debts and acknowledged 
knowing about them at the time she completed her application.  
 
Applicant claimed that she made an honest mistake when she failed to disclose 
her delinquent debts. Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 
education, maturity, the plain language of the question, the number and value of the 
debts, the periods during which the debts have been delinquent, and having observed 
her appearance and demeanor while testifying, I find her explanations and her claim of 
honest mistake not credible. Applicant’s deliberate falsification of her September 2007 
 
9 
 
 
                                           
application for a public trust position triggers the applicability of disqualifying condition 
AG ¶ 16  
 
(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
After considering all the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions, I find none apply. 
Applicant engaged in serious misconduct when she falsified her September 2007 public 
trust position application. Her falsification is a recent, felony-level offense.4 Her overall 
behavior shows questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated in my whole-person analysis my comments 
on the analysis of Guidelines F and E. 
Applicant receives credit for her outstanding performance working for 
Government contractors. She is considered to be a hard-working, dedicated, and valued 
employee. She is also a good daughter, mother, and grandmother. To a certain extent, 
her financial problems were due to circumstances beyond her control. 
 
4 See 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
 
10 
 
 
Notwithstanding, public trust concerns remain. Applicant acquired financial 
obligations beyond her financial means and then showed disregard for her legal 
obligation to pay her debts. She failed to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility. Moreover, Applicant deliberately falsified her 2007 public trust position 
application. The record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a 
public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial considerations and personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 1.1.i,   Against Applicant 
    1.k, 1.s, 1.t, and 1.v – 1.pp: 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j,   For Applicant 
    1.l - 1.r, and 1.u: 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
