 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09794 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 11, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 31, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 19, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on May 31, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
 
June 28, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through J that 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing was not held open for the 
receipt of additional evidence.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 9, 
2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
H. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He has been married to his second wife since 2003. He 
has one stepson. He has a Ph.D in geology. Since December 2007, he has worked for 
a defense contractor. He has no military service and does not currently hold a security 
clearance. He previously worked for the Department of Energy (DOE) for two years 
(1993-1995) and held a clearance at that time.2   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: using marijuana on 
numerous occasions from 1966 (when he was 15 or 16) through August 2010 (in his 
testimony he admitted use through December 2010); purchasing and growing 
marijuana; and during an interview with a government investigator he indicated an intent 
to continue his use of marijuana in the future, but he would be willing to stop using 
marijuana if that was a condition to receiving a security clearance. (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.d). 
  
 Applicant first began using marijuana in about 1966 when he was in high school. 
He continued his use through 1993 using it on a monthly basis. He stopped using 
marijuana in 1993 when he worked for the DOE. He again resumed using it when he no 
longer worked for DOE in 1995. He used marijuana by either smoking rolled cigarettes 
or by sharing pipes with friends. His use between 1995 and August 2010 was weekly, 
usually on Friday or Saturday. From August to December 2010, his use decreased to 
about once a month. He completed his security clearance application on July 16, 2010, 
and had an investigative interview for his clearance on August 24, 2010. He stated his 
last use of marijuana was after these events in December 2010. During the course of 
his years of using marijuana, he purchased it about every year to 18 months. He 
obtained a medical marijuana card in September 2010 and purchased marijuana 
through legal marijuana dispensaries. Before obtaining the card, he purchased 
                                                          
1 Applicant sent me an ex parte email on June 29, 2011. In it he further explained his answers to 
questions about his medical marijuana card. He also asked to make further argument in his case. I 
responded to his email on July 6, 2011, denying his request. I will, however, consider the factual 
information contained in Applicant’s email concerning his medical marijuana card. Department Counsel 
had no objection. His email and my response are marked as HE II. 
 
2 Tr. at 7-8, 32-33, 35-36; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana illegally. In the 1970s he grew marijuana for a short time. He no longer 
engages in that activity.3  
  
 Applicant used marijuana because he believed using it was similar to drinking 
alcohol in a social manner. He also believes marijuana should be legal and cited the 
legality of marijuana in some states for medical purposes. He did admit, however, that 
his wife does not condone his use of marijuana and that he has not informed her of his 
use on occasions. He has never been through a drug evaluation or treatment program.4 
 
 Applicant originally obtained the medical marijuana card because he was 
experiencing pain in his ankle from an earlier surgical procedure. He used the marijuana 
to alleviate the pain he was then experiencing. He then received physical therapy for his 
ankle, which relieved the pain such that he no longer needed to use the marijuana for 
that purpose. He does not intend to renew his medical marijuana card when it expires in 
September 2011.5  
 
 Applicant testified that he does not intend to use drugs in the future. Although in 
an earlier statement to an investigator, he stated that he would continue to use 
marijuana but would discontinue his use if he received a security clearance. He also 
offered into evidence a signed statement manifesting an intent not to use drugs. 
Additionally, he offered to undergo drug testing. However, his company does not 
currently have a drug-testing program.6  
 
 He presented statements from his friends, colleagues, former instructors, and 
coworkers that described him as honest, reliable, and trustworthy. His most recent 
performance appraisal rated him as an overall “exceptional contributor” (rating of 5.0). 
He also offered evidence of his involvement in community activities.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 21; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 46, 62, 71-72; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 43-44, 66, 75-76. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-43, 60; GE 2; AE H. 
 
7 AE A-G. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
5 
 
 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clarify and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Appellant used and purchased marijuana on a number of occasions. He also 
grew marijuana on one occasion. He also made an ambiguous statement to an 
investigator about his continued drug use. I find the above disqualifying condition 
applies. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has a 43-year history of marijuana use. He stopped using for two years 
when he worked for the DOE, but started again when he no longer held that position. 
He even used marijuana after completing his security clearance application and 
investigative interview. His last use occurred in December 2010. He used marijuana 
despite his wife’s desire that he not do so. Applicant’s use of drugs was long-term, 
frequent, and recent. The period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s 
intent not to use in the future. Additionally, even though he signed a statement 
indicating his intent not to use in the future, his own past track record undercuts that 
assertion. He stopped using when he went to work for the DOE then began again. He 
has used marijuana for 43 years. For all these reasons, Applicant has not presented 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns based upon his drug use. Neither 
AG ¶ 26(a) nor AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s supportive 
character evidence, his job appraisal, his community involvement, and his willingness to 
be drug-tested. I also considered Applicant’s statement of intent not to use drugs in the 
future. However, I also weighed that he used marijuana for 43 years, and as recently as 
December 2010, which was after he applied for a security clearance and after his 
investigative interview. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
