 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                                        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
   ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 10-07752 
                                                  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                  Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on June 1, 2009. On February 10, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 5, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 5, 2011. I convened a 
hearing on July 25, 2011, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called 
 
2 
 
 
no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 5 and 
admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called 
no witnesses. He introduced three exhibits and offered one document for administrative 
notice. Applicant’s exhibits were marked as Exhibits (Ex.) A, B, and C and entered in 
the record without objection. His administrative notice document was marked as 
Document (Doc.) A and included, without objection, in the record for notice. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on August 2, 2011. 
 
     Procedural Matters 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h. reads: “You were denied access to classified information in about 
May 2009 by another government agency, in part, for continuing to consume alcohol 
after having undergone an alcohol assessment on September 12, 2007, and diagnosed 
as meeting DSM-IV criteria for Alcohol Dependence.” In his April 5, 2011, Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegation 1.h. At hearing, Applicant requested leave to 
amend, in part, his answer to SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant stated that he admitted that his 
access to classified information had been denied in May 2009 by another government 
agency. However, Applicant denied that he had undergone an alcohol assessment on 
September 12, 2007, and had been diagnosed as alcohol dependent. (SOR; Tr. 8-11.) 
 
 Prior to the hearing, Department Counsel had received notice of Applicant’s 
intent to amend his answer to SOR ¶ 1.h., and he did not object to Applicant’s request. I 
granted Applicant leave to amend his answer to SOR ¶ 1.h. from an admission to a 
partial denial. (Tr. 8-11.)    
 
                                          Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the eight Guideline G allegations. At hearing, Applicant amended his answer to 
SOR ¶ 1.h. from an admission to a partial denial. Applicant’s admissions are entered as 
findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 33 years old, is divorced and has no children. He is pursing a 
degree in business management. Since 2004, Applicant has been employed by a 
government contractor as a construction security technician and program manager. (Ex. 
1; Tr. 29-30, 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant enlisted in the U.S. military in January 1997. He was first awarded a 
security clearance in 2001, when he carried out sensitive matters and responsibilities 
overseas. He received an honorable discharge in October 2004, after serving in the 
military for seven years and ten months. During employment with his current employer, 
Applicant has held a security clearance and, for certain contracts, has also been read 
into higher levels of access. During his military service and in his civilian service as a 
government contractor, Applicant received briefings and training in handling classified 
material. (Tr. 27, 32-33, 46-48, 50.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant began consuming alcohol when he was 16 years old. In August 1995, 
when Applicant was 17 years old, he was arrested and charged with Underage 
Drinking. He was fined and required to write an essay for the Juvenile Court on 
Underage Drinking. In October 1995, as the driver of a vehicle, Applicant was arrested 
and charged with Open Container in a Vehicle and Underage Drinking. He was fined 
and sentenced to attend a one-day class for teenaged alcohol offenders. This alcohol-
related conduct was alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c. (SOR; Tr. 59-62.) 
 
 In November 1998, while deployed overseas, Applicant received nonjudicial 
punishment under Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice for the following 
offenses: Incapacitated for Duty, Unauthorized Absence from Duty, and Violate a Lawful 
Order by Consuming Beer or Liquor Within 8 Hours of Duties. He received a reduction 
in rate to the next inferior pay grade (suspended for six months); forfeiture of one-half of 
a month’s pay for two months (suspended one month of forfeiture for six months), and 
45 days restriction and extra duties. Additionally, Applicant was directed to attend one 
meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and to meet with his unit’s alcohol counselor.1 
This alcohol-related conduct was alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.e. During the rest of his 
military service, Applicant continued to consume alcohol. (SOR; Ex. 5; Tr. 34-35, 63-
67.)   
 
 At the time he separated from military service in October 2004, Applicant held a 
security clearance and had also been granted access to Sensitive Compartmented 
Information (SCI). When Applicant went to work for his government contractor employer 
in December 2004, the employer expected for him to carry over his security access and 
to use it in carrying out his new duties. In December 2004, while on a ski trip with 
friends, Applicant used marijuana one time while under the influence of alcohol and 
while holding a security clearance.2 This behavior is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. (SOR; Tr.67-
69.)  
 
 In October 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Operating Under 
the Influence of Alcohol and (2) Reckless Driving. Applicant’s blood alcohol level was 
.21. He pled guilty to Count (1). His driving privileges were suspended for eight months, 
and he was ordered to attend a 12-hour intoxicated driver resource class. Additionally, 
Applicant was fined $980 and assessed $1,000 a year for three years. Count (2) was 
dismissed. This alcohol-related behavior was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. (SOR; Ex. 1 at 41-
44; Ex. 3 at 3-4; Tr. 70-72.) 
 
 
1 Applicant described his meeting with the alcohol counselor as follows: “. . . I did have to go meet with 
him. We sat down. He questioned, you know, behavior things, my social life and things outside of work, 
things at work and everything of that nature. And that was about it. I mean nothing came of it.” (Tr. 66.) 
 
2 Applicant acknowledged that he had previously used marijuana in his teen years. He also 
acknowledged that he knew that the use of illegal drugs was proscribed for those holding security 
clearances. He did not tell his Facility Security Officer (FSO) that he had used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. (Tr. 69-70.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant told his immediate supervisor of his October 2006 arrest. He completed 
the 12-week intoxicated driver course. As a participant in the course, he was not 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or as alcohol dependent. He did not receive a 
diagnosis or a prognosis. He completed the course as required. (Tr. 72-73.)  
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant consumed alcohol, “at times to excess 
and to the point of intoxication, to include blackouts, from approximately 1995 to at least 
2010.” In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.a. 
However, at his hearing, he stated that he had not experienced blackouts after 
consuming alcohol since 2006. He acknowledged that he continued to consume alcohol 
and, since 2006, he had consumed alcohol to intoxication. He stated that he did not 
operate a motor vehicle after drinking alcohol but, instead, took public transportation. 
(Tr. 40, 51-59, 81.) 
 
 As discussed above under Procedural Matters, SOR ¶ 1.h. alleges that Applicant 
was denied access to classified information in May 2009 by another government 
agency. The other government agency stated that it was denying Applicant access, in 
part, because he had continued to consume alcohol after having undergone an alcohol 
assessment on September 12, 2007, in which he had been diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent. (SOR) 
 
 The Government’s evidence in support of SOR allegation 1.h. is a Clearance 
Decision Statement from the other government agency, addressed to Applicant and 
dated June 11, 2009. The document informs Applicant that the other government 
agency disapproved him for additional access and revoked his existing access on May 
7, 2009. Applicant provided the document to DOHA in response to interrogatories in 
November 2010. He did not object to its admission at his hearing. However, Applicant 
questioned the validity and credibility of the diagnosis as reported in the Clearance 
Decision Statement because the diagnosis itself was not included in the record.3 The 
Clearance Decision Statement reads, in pertinent part: “As part of your security 
processing, you underwent an alcohol assessment on 12 September 2007, by a 
credentialed mental health professional. At the conclusion of the evaluation, you were 
diagnosed as meeting the DSM-IV criteria for alcohol dependence.”4 Although the 
Clearance Decision Statement notified him that he could request a review of the 
agency’s security determination, Applicant failed to do so. (Ex. 2, 1-4; Tr. 76-77.) 
 
 
3 DOHA’s Appeal Board has ruled that Clearance Decision Statements may be admitted under ¶ E3.1.20 
of the Directive without authentication. See ISCR Case No. 02-12199 at 4, 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2005) 
Applicant failed to rebut the presumption of good faith and regularity regarding the determination of the 
other government agency in his case. There was nothing on the face of the Clearance Decision 
Statement or in its contents to suggest that it was not an official record of the other agency or that it was 
prepared or maintained in other than the regular course of agency business.   
 
4 I take administrative notice that DSM-IV refers to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (4th ed.), Washington, D.C. The DSM-IV is the work product of the American Psychiatric 
Association. (Administrative Notice Document A.) 
 
5 
 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant stated that he disagreed with the agency’s conclusion 
that he was alcohol dependent. He acknowledged that he went to two facilities of the 
other government agency on September 12, 2007. He reported that at one facility his 
blood was drawn and he provided a sample for urinalysis. He reported that he had a 
one and a half hour interview about his alcohol use at the other facility. He denied that 
the interview was an alcohol assessment by a credentialed mental health professional. 
He provided no documentation or evidence to rebut or refute the other government 
agency’s finding that he was alcohol dependent. (Tr. 41-43, 73-74.) 
 
 Applicant provided a certificate of excellence from his employer, dated October 
2008. The certificate recognized Applicant’s outstanding performance and contribution. 
Applicant also provided an undated certificate of achievement from his employer 
recognizing Applicant’s five years of service with the company. Additionally, Applicant 
provided a certificate of appreciation from his employer dated August 2010. (Ex. A;  Ex. 
B; Ex. C.)  
 
 He continues to consume alcohol. He claims he has matured since 2006, when 
was arrested for operating a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol. Although he 
admits to intoxication since 2006, he says he drinks moderately and responsibly. He 
stated that he last consumed alcohol two weeks before his hearing. (Tr. 77-80.) 
  
            Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
 
6 
 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d. alleges the same conduct as is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. and is 
therefore duplicative. Accordingly, I conclude SOR ¶ 1.d. for Applicant.  
 
I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions. I 
conclude that Guideline G disqualifying conditions at ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 22(c), and 22(d)  
apply in Applicant’s case. AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(b) reads: “alcohol-related 
incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or impaired 
condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c) reads: “habitual or binge consumption 
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(d) reads: “diagnosis by 
a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or 
psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.”  
 
I also considered AG ¶ 22(f), which reads: “relapse after diagnosis of alcohol 
abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.”  I recognize 
that the other government agency’s evaluation of Applicant as alcohol dependent has 
been established by the Government. While Applicant has denied being diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent, he has neither rebutted nor refuted the allegation. His participation 
in a 12-week intoxicated driver’s course occurred before his assessment as alcohol 
dependent. The record does not reflect that Applicant received a diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence when he took the 12-week alcohol education course. Accordingly, even 
though Applicant continues to consume alcohol after his diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence by a duly qualified professional during an investigation of his security 
worthiness by another government agency, that conduct cannot be established as 
relapse under the facts of this case. I conclude, therefore, that AG ¶ 22(f) does not 
apply.5 
   
Applicant began consuming alcohol as an adolescent when he was not yet old 
enough to drink legally. During his military service, his alcohol consumption led, at 
times, to binge drinking, intoxication, and blackouts. In 1998, Applicant’s use of alcohol 
made him unfit to carry out his military duties. In December 2004, when he was under 
the influence of alcohol, Applicant used marijuana, while holding a security clearance. 
He was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol in 2006. His blood alcohol 
level was .21. In September 2007, Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent by a 
credentialed medical professional. He continues to consume alcohol. These facts raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 22(c), and 22(d). 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
 
5 AG ¶¶ 22(e) and 22(g) are not raised by the facts of this case. 
 
8 
 
 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23(d) if “the individual has 
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with 
any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has 
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.” 
  
 Applicant is now 33 years old. He admitted consuming alcohol in excess and to 
the point of intoxication, including blackouts, from 1995 to 2006. In December 2004, 
while holding a security clearance, he used marijuana after consuming alcohol. His 
arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol occurred in October 2006. He 
participated in alcohol awareness education twice in 1995. In 1998, after his nonjudicial 
punishment, he was directed to attend an AA meeting and to meet with his unit’s alcohol 
counselor. He was directed to attend a 12-week intoxicated driver resource class after 
his arrest for driving under the influence in 2006. In 2007, he was investigated for a 
higher level of access. During that investigation by another government agency, he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He continues to consume alcohol, sometimes to 
intoxication. He no longer drives after consuming alcohol. I conclude that none of the 
Guideline G mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young adult who is 
skilled and competent in his area of expertise. His employer considers him to be 
effective and reliable. During his military service, Applicant was entrusted, at a relatively 
 
9 
 
 
young age, with responsibility for safeguarding classified information. He also received 
training in his responsibilities to safeguard classified information. He knew that the use 
of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance raised very serious concerns about an 
individual’s security worthiness. Even so, he used marijuana after consuming alcohol. 
He has continued to consume alcohol after being diagnosed as alcohol dependent. 
Applicant’s actions raise concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant disagreed with the Clearance Decision Statement and 
denied that he had been diagnosed as alcohol dependent during an investigation of his 
security worthiness by another government agency. He did not provide a recent 
assessment by a duly qualified medical professional of his current alcohol use and 
status. Moreover, he provided no other information or documentation to rebut or refute 
the other government agency’s determination that he is alcohol dependent. His 
unsupported disagreement is insufficient to meet his burden of persuasion. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his   
alcohol consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.:   Against Applicant      
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e. -1.h.:  Against Applicant  
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
