 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                                        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
             )  ISCR Case No. 10-03469 
                                                                      )                                            
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
                                           Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on December 14, 2009. On March 24, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 13, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that his 
case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. On June 8, 2011, the 
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
documents identified as Items 1 through 7. By letter dated June 9, 2011, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
June 20, 2011. His response was due on July 20, 2011. On August 3, 2011, the case 
was assigned to me for a decision.   
 
Applicant filed an eight-page document in response to the FORM within the 
required time period. Department Counsel did not object to the admission of Applicant’s 
additional information. Accordingly, I marked Applicant’s document as Item A and 
admitted it to the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted two Guideline G allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.). He denied three 
allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.d., and 1.e.). Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings 
of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant. The record evidence includes Applicant’s 
December 14, 2009 e-QIP; his statement to an authorized investigator from the U.S 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM); official agency records; Applicant’s Answer to 
the SOR and responses to the FORM; and Applicant’s medical treatment record, 
certified as a true and complete copy on September 7, 2010. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6; 
Item 7; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, never married, and without children. In 2006, he earned 
a master’s degree. He is employed as an engineering manager by a federal contractor, 
and he has worked for his current employer since April 2008. Applicant describes 
himself as a “very bright and talented individual” who has “excelled and advanced 
quickly within the company.” He seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Item 4; 
Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator on January 22, 2010, about 
his arrest history, use of alcohol, and alcohol counseling.1 He provided the investigator 
with information about his history of alcohol consumption. (Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol in 1995, when he was 19 years old. He 
attended a university from 1996 to 2000, and he continued consuming alcohol during 
 
1On August 26, 2010, Applicant certified, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the 
OPM investigator’s five-page report was a true and accurate summary of the information he provided to 
the investigator during his January 22, 2010, interview. (Item 6.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
his university years. Before he was 21, Applicant drank alcohol purchased by others. As 
a university student, Applicant’s maximum consumption of alcohol on any one occasion 
was 10-15 beers over a whole day and night. He normally consumed six to eight beers 
over a period of several hours, and he estimated that he was intoxicated about 60 
percent of the time that he chose to drink. He also consumed alcohol to the point of 
blackouts during this time. (Item 6.)  
 
 After graduating from university, Applicant obtained work in April 2001 as a 
senior product design engineer, a position he held until April 2008, when he joined his 
current employer. During this time, Applicant consumed alcohol with his friends at bars 
once a weekend or once every other weekend. If there was a designated driver among 
his party, Applicant would consume six to eight beers over a span of five or six hours. 
Sometimes, he would substitute shots of liquor for some of the beers. If he consumed 
mixed drinks at these events, Applicant would consume three to five mixed drinks over 
five or six hours. When he drank at this level, Applicant became intoxicated about 30 
percent of the time. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 In December 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with Operating While 
Intoxicated (OWI). When he was arrested, Applicant’s blood alcohol level was 0.16%. 
Applicant pled guilty to the OWI charge. He was sentenced to six months probation and 
three days of community service. He was also directed to attend a one-day alcohol 
education class. Applicant completed all provisions of his sentence. Applicant’s 
December 2001 arrest and charge of OWI is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Item 1; Item 5; Item 
6.) 
 
 In November 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
OWI/Impaired/Controlled Substance, second offense. His blood alcohol level was .17%.  
Applicant pled guilty to the charge. He was fined, sentenced to one day in jail, 80 hours 
of community service, and two years of reporting probation.2 He was also ordered to 
attend alcohol counseling.3 Applicant’s November 2008 arrest and charge is alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 1; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 The attorney who represented Applicant in the adjudication of his November 
2008 OWI arrest and charge suggested that Applicant seek alcohol counseling. 
Applicant agreed to do so because he was interested in learning more about his 
drinking habits. Applicant participated in an alcohol treatment program from December 
2008 through August 2009. In December 2008, Applicant was evaluated for substance 
abuse by a licensed clinical social worker who was a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program. The licensed clinical social worker provided the following 
diagnosis: 
 
 
2 Applicant was discharged from probation on November 6, 2009. (Item 5 at 32.) 
 
3 Applicant’s second OWI was not adjudicated until March 2009. At that time, Applicant was in voluntary 
alcohol treatment suggested by his attorney. The court ordered Applicant to continue his alcohol 
treatment, which he did. (Item 6 at 3.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Based on information obtained, I would diagnose [Applicant] as alcohol 
dependence, 303.9.  Although his SASSI-3 [Substance Abuse Subtle 
Screening Inventory] does not indicate chemical dependence, his self-
described history of two drunk driving tickets, heavy drinking during 
college with blackouts, and binge drinking at other times accompanied 
with blackouts indicate a pattern of poor judgment and impulse control, 
and an inability to control his drinking once he starts to drink. 
 
(Item A at 5; Item 4; Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol 
dependence and received treatment for that condition from December 2008 until August 
2009. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied he had been diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent. To support his denial, he relied upon his counselor’s observation that his 
SASSI-3 indicated that he had a low probability of having a substance abuse disorder. 
(Item 1; Item 4; Item A.)  
 
 Applicant told the OPM investigator that he did not consume alcohol after his 
November 2008 arrest. However, he admitted consuming alcohol in late December 
2008 when visiting a friend for the holidays. Thereafter, he abstained from alcohol use 
from January 2009 until November 2009, in order to comply with the terms of his 
probation. In November 2009, Applicant resumed his consumption of alcohol. He 
claimed to be consuming alcohol at a moderate rate when he was interviewed by the 
investigator in January 2010. He provided no documentation in support of his claim of 
moderate consumption. (Item 6.)  
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant continues to consume alcohol 
notwithstanding his treatment for alcohol dependence. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant acknowledged that, since his alcohol treatment, he has consumed alcohol and 
he intends to consume alcohol in the future in social situations. He denied that he was 
advised by his therapist to abstain from alcohol use after his diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence. (Item 4.)  
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess 
and to the point of intoxication, from approximately 1995 to January 2010. Applicant 
denied the allegation and stated that he did not consume alcohol while participating in 
his alcohol treatment program (December 2008 until August 2009) and while he was on 
probation following the adjudication of his second OWI (March to November 2009). 
Applicant provided a record showing he attended 17 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings between December 8, 2008 and May 30, 2009. He did not deny that he has 
resumed consuming alcohol. While he claimed his current alcohol consumption is 
moderate, he provided no documentation to corroborate his claim. (Item1; Item 4; Item 
A.)  
 
 The discharge summary from the alcohol treatment center identified alcohol 
dependence as Applicant’s discharge diagnosis. The discharge summary noted that 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s alcohol dependence was in remission, and he had satisfactorily completed 
all treatment goals. The therapist proposed that Applicant follow an aftercare plan that 
would include more AA involvement. (Item 7.)  
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions. I 
conclude that Guideline G disqualifying conditions at ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), 22(e), and 22(f) 
apply in Applicant’s case. AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c) reads: “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(e) reads: 
“evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker 
who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment center.” AG ¶ 22(f) reads: 
“relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol 
rehabilitation program.” 
   
In 2001 and 2008, Applicant was arrested for OWI. Beginning in 1995, Applicant 
habitually consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment. He was diagnosed in 
December 2008 as alcohol dependent by a licensed clinical social worker who was a 
staff member at a recognized alcohol treatment program. After successfully completing 
an alcohol rehabilitation program and abstaining from alcohol use for approximately one 
year to comply with his probation and treatment, Applicant began to consume alcohol 
again. He asserts that he intends to consume alcohol in the future. While he claims his 
alcohol consumption is now moderate, he failed to provide corroboration of his claim. 
These facts raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), 22(e), and 22(f). 
 
7 
 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant is now 34 years old. He denied consuming alcohol at times to excess 
and to the point of intoxication from 1995 to January 2010. He admitted consuming 
alcohol in December 2008, after his diagnosis of alcohol dependence and after 
commencing participation in AA, but he asserts that he did not consume alcohol while 
on probation from his second OWI and during his alcohol treatment program. He 
continues to consume alcohol after a diagnosis of alcohol dependence. He has failed to 
establish a pattern of abstinence.  Moreover, Applicant’s denials of SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.d., 
and 1.e. lack credibility. The record establishes the facts asserted in the allegations, and 
Applicant has failed to provide documentation to rebut or mitigate the allegations. 
Accordingly, I conclude that none of the Guideline G mitigating conditions fully applies 
to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a well-educated mature 
adult who considers himself to be highly intelligent. He has worked for his present 
employer for three years.  
 
At the same time, since 2001, Applicant has been arrested twice for operating a 
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. After his arrest in 2008, he entered an 
alcohol rehabilitation program, where he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. After 
completing alcohol rehabilitation, he continues to drink alcohol. Applicant’s conduct 
raises questions about his current judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to 
protect classified information.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his   
alcohol consumption.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.  - 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                            ________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
