 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10781 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John M. Scorsine, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 18, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 19, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on May 31, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
 
June 28, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, presented one witness, and offered exhibit 
(AE) A that was admitted into evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AE B that was admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s transmittal memorandum is marked as HE II. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 11, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
H. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 22 years old. He is single and has no children. He has a high school 
diploma and is currently attending college. Since June 2010, he has worked for a 
defense contractor as an engineering aid. He works full time for the contractor during 
the summer months and part-time during the school year when he is a full-time student. 
He has no military service and has not previously held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: using marijuana on 
numerous occasions from January 2006 through March 2010; purchasing marijuana; 
using ecstasy from February 2009 through March 2010; purchasing ecstasy; and using 
the prescription drug Percocet, that was not prescribed to him, in October 2008 (See 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e). 
  
 Applicant first began using marijuana as a senior in high school. Initially, he used 
marijuana about once a week but over time that use gradually decreased so that he was 
using about once a month at the time of his last use in March 2010. Using marijuana 
was mostly a social event for him. He used it at parties and would obtain it from friends. 
Sometimes we would purchase the marijuana and other times it was given to him. He 
maintained a supply of marijuana for his own use. His two most recent uses of 
marijuana were when he visited with friends. First, in January 2010 during a ski trip he 
used marijuana four times over the course of a week. His last use of marijuana was in 
March 2010. He traveled to see some friends and during the course of his visit, he used 
marijuana three times in a week. He has not used marijuana since applying for a 
security clearance with his current employer.2  
 
 In addition to marijuana, Applicant used ecstasy on two occasions. The first time 
he used it was in February 2009 when he was visiting some friends. He ingested about 
one quarter of a gram. His friend gave him the ecstasy. His second use of ecstasy was 
in March 2010. On the same trip to see friends where he last used marijuana, he also 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 29-31; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 31-35; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
used ecstasy for the last time. Once again, his friends had the ecstasy and gave him 
some to use. He paid for the ecstasy. He used the ecstasy because he was encouraged 
by his friends. He also used non-prescribed Percocet on one occasion in October 2008 
while attending college. One of his friends had the Percocet and suggested that he try it. 
This was the only time he used it.3 
 
 Applicant decided to stop using all drugs prior to applying for his present position. 
He realized that using drugs had no positive effect on his life. According to him, he has 
not used marijuana since that time. He also has disassociated with many of the friends 
who used drugs with him, although he still has some infrequent contact with two 
marijuana-using friends. He lives and goes to school in a different location than these 
friends so he is able to maintain distance from them. He was not diagnosed as either a 
drug abuser or drug dependant and has not been through any drug treatment program.4  
 
 Applicant admitted the full extent of his drug use in his initial security clearance 
application (SF 86) and he also described in detail his drug use to a DOD investigator. 
He also offered into evidence a hair analysis drug screening test that showed negative 
results for five drugs including THC (the metabolite found in marijuana). The test was 
reported on June 17, 2011. The test purports to capture a look-back window of 90 days 
of possible drug activity. Applicant also submitted a written statement of intent not to 
use any illegal drugs in the future.5  
 
 The security representative from Applicant’s company testified for him and stated 
that Applicant passed the pre-employment drug screening test. He also stated that 
Applicant was smart, trustworthy, and had integrity. He recommended Applicant for a 
security clearance.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 36-37, 40; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 36, 50; GE 2. 
 
5 GE 1; AE A, B. 
 
6 Tr. at 20-28. 
 
 
4 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession. 
 
 Appellant used and possessed marijuana on a number of occasions. He also 
used ecstasy on two occasions and Percocet on one. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Although Applicant’s marijuana use was frequent, his use of ecstasy and 
Percocet was infrequent. However, he has abstained from all drug use for over one 
year. That abstinence is partially corroborated by the drug test offered into evidence. 
Given his young age and the circumstances of his use (experimentation with friends in 
high school and college), the uses happened under circumstances unlikely to recur. His 
change of lifestyle, the negative drug test, and the positive recommendation from the 
security manager all support the conclusion that his past use does not affect his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. The period of 
abstinence is sufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the future. 
Additionally, he has disassociated from most of his drug using friends and submitted a 
sworn statement of intent not to use any drugs in the future with automatic revocation of 
clearance for non-compliance. AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the Applicant’s 
supportive character evidence and his negative drug test. I also considered Applicant’s 
statement of intent not to use drugs in the future. I also weighed that he used marijuana 
on numerous occasions, his age at the time of use, and the circumstances of his use. 
He also demonstrated a commitment toward non-use of any drugs in the future. 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
